CIK: 101778
Company Name: MARATHON OIL CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2020-02-20
Accession Number: 0000101778-20-000023


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further detail on current year results. United States U.S. Resource Plays Eagle Ford We have been operating in the South Texas Eagle Ford play since 2011, where our acreage is located in the high-return Karnes, Atascosa, Gonzales and Lavaca Counties. Our focus is capital efficient development with a goal of maximizing returns and cash flow generation while extending our core acreage. During 2019, we acquired 18,000 net acres adjacent to our existing acreage in the Eagle Ford, which included production of approximately 7,000 net boed and associated midstream infrastructure. Additionally, we operate 32 central gathering and treating facilities across the play that support more than 1,600 producing wells as well as own and operate the Sugarloaf gathering system, a 42-mile natural gas pipeline through the heart of our acreage in Karnes and Atascosa Counties. Bakken We have been operating in the Williston Basin since 2006. The majority of our core acreage is within McKenzie, Mountrail, and Dunn Counties in North Dakota targeting the Middle Bakken and Three Forks reservoirs. We continue focusing our investment in our high-return Myrmidon and Hector areas, while also delineating and extending our core acreage across the rest of our position. Oklahoma With a history in Oklahoma that dates back more than 100 years, our primary focus has recently been early infill development in the STACK Meramec and SCOOP Woodford, while progressing delineation of other plays across our footprint. We primarily hold net acreage with rights to the Woodford, Springer, Meramec, Osage and other prospect intervals, with a majority of this in the SCOOP and STACK, with our recent activity in these plays being directed towards the more advantaged overpressured oil areas. Northern Delaware We have been operating in the Northern Delaware basin, which is located within the greater Permian area, since closing on two major acquisitions in 2017. Our focus has been to strategically advance our position and prepare for future development by further coring up our footprint, progressing early delineation of our acreage, improving our cost structure and securing midstream solutions. We have the majority of our acreage in Eddy and Lea counties primarily in the Wolfcamp and Bone Spring New Mexico plays. United States Resource Exploration Our resource exploration properties in the United States include our acquired acreage in the emerging Louisiana Austin Chalk play, with an acreage position focused in the Western Fairway. Our first exploration well is on flowback and well clean-up and we have recently spud on our second exploration well. We also closed on approximately 40,000 net acres in the Texas Delaware oil play in West Texas for $106 million in 2019. International Segment We are engaged in oil and gas development and production activities in E.G. We include the results of our investments in the LPG processing plant, gas liquefaction operations and methanol production operations in E.G. in our International segment. International Equatorial Guinea We own a 63% operated working interest under a production sharing contract in the Alba field and an 80% operated working interest in Block D, both of which are offshore E.G. Operational availability from our company-operated facilities averaged approximately 97% in 2019 . Equatorial Guinea Gas Processing We own a 52% interest in Alba Plant LLC, accounted for as an equity method investment, which operates an onshore LPG processing plant located on Bioko Island. Alba field natural gas is processed by the LPG plant under a fixed-price long term contract. The LPG plant extracts secondary condensate and LPG from the natural gas stream and uses some of the remaining dry natural gas in its operations. 6 We also own 60% of EGHoldings and 45% of AMPCO, both accounted for as equity method investments. EGHoldings operates a 3.7 mmta LNG production facility and AMPCO operates a methanol plant, both located on Bioko Island. These facilities allow us to further monetize natural gas production from the Alba field. The LNG production facility sells LNG under a 3.4 mmta sales and purchase agreement. Under the current agreement, which runs through 2023, the purchaser takes delivery of the LNG on Bioko Island, with pricing linked principally to the Henry Hub index. Gross sales of LNG from this production facility totaled approximately 3 mmta in 2019 . AMPCO had gross sales totaling approximately 878 mt in 2019 . Methanol production is sold to customers in Europe and the U.S. During 2019, we executed agreements for third-party gas through existing E.G. infrastructure, the initial step in creating an E.G. gas hub. Natural gas from the Alen field will be processed through the existing Alba Plant LLC LPG processing plant and the EGHoldings LNG production facility. First gas sales are expected in early 2021. United Kingdom In the third quarter of 2019, we closed on the sale of our U.K. business, which represents a complete country exit. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail. Other International Kurdistan Region of Iraq In the second quarter of 2019, we closed on the sale of our 15% non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan which represents a complete country exit. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail. Reserves Proved reserves are required to be disclosed by continent and by country if the proved reserves related to any geographic area, on an oil equivalent barrel basis, represent 15% or more of our total proved reserves. A geographic area can be an individual country, group of countries within a continent or a continent. For additional detail on reserves, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Supplementary Information on Oil and Gas Producing Activities . The following tables set forth estimated quantities of our total proved crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas reserves based upon SEC pricing for period ended December 31, 2019 . Crude Oil and Condensate (mmbbl) Natural Gas Liquids (mmbbl) Natural Gas (bcf) Total (mmboe) Total (%) Proved Developed Reserves U.S. 304 122 825 563 47 % E.G. 30 19 649 158 13 % Total proved developed reserves ( mmboe ) 334 141 1,474 721 60 % Proved Undeveloped Reserves U.S. 315 82 453 473 39 % E.G. 3 2 41 11 1 % Total proved undeveloped reserves ( mmboe ) 318 84 494 484 40 % Total Proved Reserves U.S. 619 204 1,278 1,036 86 % E.G. 33 21 690 169 14 % Total proved reserves (mmboe) 652 225 1,968 1,205 100 % Total proved reserves (%) 54 % 19 % 27 % 100 % 7 Productive and Drilling Wells For our United States and International segments, the following table sets forth gross and net productive wells, service wells and drilling wells as of December 31 for the years presented. Productive Wells Oil Natural Gas Service Wells Drilling Wells Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net 2019 U.S. 4,984 2,195 1,550 615 204 20 30 15 E.G. 19 12 Total (a) 4,984 2,195 1,569 627 204 20 30 15 2018 U.S. (b) 4,630 2,056 1,703 655 209 21 E.G. 19 12 Other International 62 22 11 4 24 8 Total (c) 4,692 2,078 1,733 671 233 29 2017 U.S. 5,132 1,905 1,690 676 799 70 E.G. 19 12 Libya 1,071 175 7 2 94 16 Total Africa 1,071 175 26 14 94 16 Other International 61 22 19 7 23 8 Total 6,264 2,102 1,735 697 916 94 (a) Other International was removed from 2019 due to the sale of our U.K. business and our 15% non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. (b) The 2018 decrease in gross productive oil wells and gross service wells is a result of the sale of non-core, non-operated conventional properties in the United States segment during the third quarter of 2018. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for information about these dispositions. (c) Libya was removed from 2018 due to the sale of our subsidiary in Libya. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. 8 Drilling Activity For our United States and International segments, the table below sets forth, by geographic area, the number of net productive and dry development and exploratory wells completed as of December 31 for the years represented. Development Exploratory Oil Natural Gas Dry Total Oil Natural Gas Dry Total Total 2019 U.S. 197 28 225 57 26 2 85 310 E.G. Total (a) 197 28 225 57 26 2 85 310 2018 U.S. 171 25 196 66 36 2 104 300 E.G. 1 1 1 Other International Total (b) 171 25 196 66 36 3 105 301 2017 U.S. 107 27 134 88 16 104 238 E.G. Libya Total Africa Other International 2 2 2 Total 107 27 134 88 16 2 106 240 (a) Other International was removed from 2019 due to the sale of our U.K. business and our 15% non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. (b) Libya was removed from 2018 due to the sale of our subsidiary in Libya. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. Acreage We believe we have satisfactory title to our United States and International properties in accordance with standards generally accepted in the industry; nevertheless, we can be involved in title disputes from time to time which may result in litigation. In the case of undeveloped properties, an investigation of record title is made at the time of acquisition. Drilling title opinions are usually prepared before commencement of drilling operations. Our title to properties may be subject to burdens such as royalty, overriding royalty, carried, net profits, working and other similar interests and contractual arrangements customary in the industry. In addition, our interests may be subject to obligations or duties under applicable laws or burdens such as net profits interests, liens related to operating agreements, development obligations or capital commitments under international production sharing contracts or exploration licenses. The following table sets forth, by geographic area, the gross and net developed and undeveloped acreage held as of December 31, 2019 . Developed Undeveloped Developed and Undeveloped (In thousands) Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net U.S. 1,388 993 391 306 1,779 1,299 E.G. 82 67 82 67 Total 1,470 1,060 391 306 1,861 1,366 9 In the ordinary course of business, based on our evaluations of certain geologic trends and prospective economics, we have allowed certain lease acreage to expire and may allow additional acreage to expire in the future. If production is not established or we take no other action to extend the terms of the leases, undeveloped acreage listed in the table below could expire over the next three years. We plan to continue the terms of certain of these leases through operational or administrative actions. There are no material quantities of net proved undeveloped reserves assigned to expiring undeveloped acreage in the next three years. Net Undeveloped Acres Expiring Year Ended December 31, (In thousands) 2020 2021 2022 U.S. 70 108 31 E.G. Total 70 108 31 10 Net Sales Volumes are presented on a continuing operations basis. At December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, the Eagle Ford, Bakken and Oklahoma fields in the United States contained 15% or more of our total proved reserves. Production for these fields along with our production from fields containing less than 15% of our total proved reserves are presented in the table below. December 31, 2019 2018 2017 Net Sales Volumes Crude oil and condensate (mbbld) (a) United States Eagle Ford 63 63 59 Bakken 86 71 46 Oklahoma 21 18 15 Northern Delaware 16 12 4 Other U.S. 4 7 9 Africa E.G. 15 17 21 Libya 7 19 Other International (b) 5 15 12 Total 210 210 185 Natural gas liquids (mbbld) United States Eagle Ford 22 23 21 Bakken 9 7 6 Oklahoma 22 20 14 Northern Delaware 6 4 1 Other U.S. 1 1 1 Africa E.G. 9 11 11 Other International (b) 1 Total 69 66 55 Natural gas (mmcfd) (c) United States Eagle Ford 130 129 125 Bakken 46 35 25 Oklahoma 210 213 149 Northern Delaware 36 26 9 Other U.S. 16 26 40 Africa E.G. 365 416 459 Libya 5 4 Other International (b) 6 14 22 Total 809 864 833 Total sales volumes (mboed) United States Eagle Ford 106 108 101 Bakken 103 84 56 Oklahoma 78 74 54 Northern Delaware 28 20 6 Other U.S. 8 12 17 Africa E.G. 85 97 109 Libya 8 20 Other International (b) 6 17 16 Total 414 420 379 (a) The amounts correspond with the basis for fiscal settlements with governments, representing equity tanker liftings and direct deliveries of liquid hydrocarbons. (b) Other International sales include sales volumes for the U.K. and the Atrush block in Kurdistan, which were both sold in 2019 and sales volumes for the non-operated Sarsang block in Kurdistan which was sold in 2018. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. (c) Includes natural gas acquired for injection and subsequent resale. 11 Average Sales Price and Production Costs per Unit are presented on a continuing operations basis by geographic area. December 31, (Dollars per unit) 2019 2018 2017 Average Sales Price per Unit (a) Crude oil and condensate (bbl) United States $ 55.80 $ 63.11 $ 49.35 Africa E.G. 48.99 55.28 46.02 Libya 73.75 60.72 Total Africa 48.99 60.65 53.11 Other International (b) 64.71 70.39 52.66 Total $ 55.54 $ 63.32 $ 50.38 Natural gas liquids (bbl) United States $ 14.22 $ 24.54 $ 20.55 Africa E.G. (d) 1.00 1.00 1.00 Total Africa 1.00 1.00 1.00 Other International (b) 37.88 41.66 39.65 Total $ 12.46 $ 20.85 $ 16.65 Natural gas (mcf) United States $ 2.18 $ 2.65 $ 2.84 Africa E.G. (c) 0.24 0.24 0.24 Libya 4.57 5.03 Total Africa 0.24 0.30 0.28 Other International (b) 5.67 8.03 6.28 Total $ 1.33 $ 1.58 $ 1.51 Average Production Costs per Unit (d) U.S. $ 9.08 $ 9.83 $ 9.49 E.G. 2.34 1.91 2.12 Libya 4.35 6.08 Other International (b) 30.42 30.02 26.61 Total $ 8.03 $ 8.68 $ 7.90 (a) Excludes gains or losses on commodity derivative instruments. (b) Other International sales include sales volumes for the U.K. and the Atrush block in Kurdistan, which were both sold in 2019 and sales volumes for the non-operated Sarsang block in Kurdistan which was sold in 2018. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. (c) Primarily represents fixed prices under long-term contracts with Alba Plant LLC, AMPCO and/or EGHoldings, which are equity method investees. We include our share of income from each of these equity method investees in our International segment. (d) Production, severance and property taxes are excluded; however, shipping and handling as well as other operating expenses are included in the production costs used in this calculation. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Supplementary Information on Oil and Gas Producing Activities - Results of Operations for Oil and Gas Production Activities for more information regarding production costs. Marketing Our reportable operating segments include activities related to the marketing and transportation of substantially all of our crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas. These activities include the transportation of production to market centers, the sale of commodities to third parties and the storage of production. We balance our various sales, storage and transportation positions in order to aggregate volumes to satisfy transportation commitments and to achieve flexibility within product types and delivery points. Such activities can include the purchase of commodities from third parties for resale. 12 Major Customers We are exposed to credit risk in the event of nonpayment by counterparties, a significant portion of which are concentrated in energy-related industries. The creditworthiness of customers and other counterparties is subject to continuing review, including the use of master netting agreements, where appropriate. In 2019 , sales to Marathon Petroleum Corporation, Flint Hills Resources, Valero Marketing and Supply, and Shell Trading and each of their respective affiliates, accounted for approximately 13% , 13% , 11% and 10% of our total revenues . In 2018 , sales to Valero Marketing and Supply and Flint Hills Resources and their respective affiliates, each accounted for approximately 11% of our total revenues. In 2017 , sales to Vitol and their respective affiliates accounted for approximately 10% of our total revenues. Gross Delivery Commitments We have committed to deliver gross quantities of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas to customers under a variety of contracts. As of December 31, 2019 , the contracts for fixed and determinable quantities were at variable, market-based pricing and related primarily to the following commitments: 2020 2021 2022 Thereafter Commitment Period Through Eagle Ford Crude and condensate (mbbld) 51 2020 Natural gas (mmcfd) 120 56 36 2022 Bakken Crude and condensate (mbbld) 10 10 10 5 - 10 2027 Natural gas (mmcfd) 3 3 3 3 - 25 2028 Other United States Natural gas (mmcfd) 4 4 1 2022 All of these contracts provide the option of delivering third-party volumes or paying a monetary shortfall penalty if production is inadequate to satisfy our commitment. In addition to the contracts discussed above, we have entered into numerous agreements for transportation and processing of our equity production. Some of these contracts have volumetric requirements which could require monetary shortfall penalties if our production is inadequate to meet the terms. Competition Competition exists in all sectors of the oil and gas industry and we compete with major integrated and independent oil and gas companies, national oil companies, and to a lesser extent, companies that supply alternative sources of energy. We compete, in particular, in the exploration for and development of new reserves, acquisition of oil and natural gas leases and other properties, the marketing and delivery of our production into worldwide commodity markets and for the labor and equipment required for exploration and development of those properties. Principal methods of competing include geological, geophysical, and engineering research and technology, experience and expertise, economic analysis in connection with portfolio management, and safely operating oil and gas producing properties. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for discussion of specific areas in which we compete and related risks. Environmental, Health and Safety Matters The Health, Environmental, Safety and Corporate Responsibility Committee of our Board of Directors is responsible for overseeing our position on public issues, including environmental, health and safety matters. Our Corporate Health, Environment, Safety and Security organization has the responsibility to ensure that our operating organizations maintain environmental compliance systems that support and foster our compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Committees comprised of certain of our officers review our overall performance associated with various environmental compliance programs. We also have a Corporate Emergency Response Team which oversees our response to any major environmental or other emergency incident involving us or any of our properties. Our businesses are subject to numerous laws and regulations relating to the protection of the environment, health and safety at the national, state and local levels. These laws and their implementing regulations and other similar state and local laws and rules can impose certain operational controls for minimization of pollution or recordkeeping, monitoring and reporting requirements or other operational or siting constraints on our business, result in costs to remediate releases of regulated substances, including crude oil and produced water, into the environment, or require costs to remediate sites to which we sent regulated substances for disposal. In some cases, these laws can impose strict liability for the entire cost of clean-up on any responsible party without regard to negligence or fault and impose liability on us for the conduct of others (such as prior owners 13 or operators of our assets) or conditions others have caused, or for our acts that complied with all applicable requirements when we performed them. We have incurred and will continue to incur capital, operating and maintenance, and remediation expenditures as a result of environmental laws and regulations. New laws have been enacted or are otherwise being considered and regulations are being adopted by various regulatory agencies on a continuing basis and the costs of compliance with these new laws and regulations can only be broadly appraised until their implementation becomes more defined. For a discussion of environmental capital expenditures and costs of compliance for air, water, solid waste and remediation, see Item 3. Legal Proceedings and Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Management Discussion and Analysis of Environmental Matters, Litigation and Contingencies . Air and Climate Change Environmental advocacy groups and regulatory agencies in the United States and other countries have focused considerable attention on the emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and other greenhouse gases and their role in climate change. Developments in greenhouse gas initiatives may affect us and other similarly situated companies operating in the oil and gas industry. As part of our commitment to environmental stewardship and as required by law, we estimate and publicly report greenhouse gas emissions from our operations. We are working to continuously improve the accuracy and completeness of these estimates. In addition, we continuously strive to improve operational and energy efficiencies through resource and energy conservation where practicable and cost effective. Government entities and other groups have filed lawsuits in several states and other jurisdictions seeking to hold a wide variety of companies that produce fossil fuels liable for the alleged impacts of the greenhouse gas emissions attributable to those fuels. The lawsuits allege damages as a result of global warming and the plaintiffs are seeking unspecified damages and abatement under various tort theories. Marathon Oil has been named as a defendant in several of these lawsuits, along with numerous other companies. Similar lawsuits may be filed in other jurisdictions. While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe that the claims made against us are without merit and will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flow. The EPA finalized a more stringent NAAQS for ozone in October 2015. States that contain any areas designated as non-attainment, and any tribes that choose to do so, will be required to complete development of implementation plans in the 2020-2022 time frame. The EPA may in the future designate additional areas as non-attainment, including areas in which we operate. The EPA is also in the process of reviewing the ozone NAAQS to determine whether to maintain the 2015 standard or to promulgate a more stringent standard. This review is expected to be complete by December 2020. The implementation of the 2015 standard, or the promulgation of a future more stringent standard, may result in an increase in costs for emission controls and requirements for additional monitoring and testing, as well as a more cumbersome permitting process. Although there may be an adverse financial impact (including compliance costs, potential permitting delays and increased regulatory requirements) associated with this revised regulation, the extent and magnitude of that impact cannot be reliably or accurately estimated due to the present uncertainty regarding any additional measures and how they will be implemented. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia largely upheld EPA 2015 standard in August 2019. No party has sought review of this decision and, therefore, it is final. In November 2016, the BLM issued a final rule to further restrict venting and/or flaring of gas from facilities subject to BLM jurisdiction, and to modify certain royalty requirements. BLM issued a two-year stay of these requirements in December 2017. In September 2018, BLM published a final rule to rescind substantial portions of the rule. The rescission was challenged by multiple parties in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California. If the judicial challenges to the rule are successful and the rule were to come back into effect, the requirements would result in additional costs of compliance as well as increased monitoring, recordkeeping and recording for some of our facilities. Hydraulic Fracturing Hydraulic fracturing is a commonly used process that involves injecting water, sand and small volumes of chemicals into the wellbore to fracture the hydrocarbon-bearing rock thousands of feet below the surface to facilitate higher flow of hydrocarbons into the wellbore. Our business uses this technique extensively throughout our operations. Hydraulic fracturing has been regulated at the state and local level through permitting and compliance requirements. Various state and local-level initiatives in regions with substantial shale resources have been or may be proposed or implemented to further regulate hydraulic fracturing practices, limit water withdrawals and water use, require disclosure of fracturing fluid constituents, restrict which additives may be used, or implement temporary or permanent bans on hydraulic fracturing. Although there may be an adverse financial impact (including compliance costs, potential permitting delays and increased regulatory requirements) associated with these initiatives, the extent and magnitude of that impact cannot be reliably or accurately estimated due to the present uncertainty regarding any additional measures and how they will be implemented. 14 Water In 2014, the EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers published proposed regulations which expand the surface waters that are regulated under the federal CWA and its various programs. While these regulations were finalized largely as proposed in 2015, the rule was stayed by the courts pending a substantive decision on the merits. In October 2019, EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers issued a final rule that repealed the 2015 regulations and reinstated the agencies narrower pre-2015 scope of federal CWA jurisdiction. In January 2020, EPA and the Army Corp of Engineers promulgated a new WOTUS definition that continues to provide a narrower scope of federal CWA jurisdiction than contemplated under the 2015 WOTUS definition, while also providing for greater predictability and consistency of federal CWA jurisdiction. Judicial challenges to EPA October 2019 final rule are currently before multiple federal district courts and challenges to EPA January 2020 final rule are anticipated. If the October 2019 final rule is vacated and the 2015 rule is ultimately implemented, the expansion of CWA jurisdiction will result in additional costs of compliance as well as increased monitoring, recordkeeping and recording for some of our facilities. For additional information, see Item 1A. Risk Factors . Trademarks, Patents and Licenses We currently hold U.S. and foreign patents. Although in the aggregate our trademarks and patents are important to us, we do not regard any single trademark, patent, or group of related trademarks or patents as critical or essential to our business as a whole. Employees We had approximately 2,000 active, full-time employees as of December 31, 2019 . Information About our Executive Officers The executive officers of Marathon Oil and their ages as of February 1, 2020 , are as follows: Lee M. Tillman 58 Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer Dane E. Whitehead 58 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer T. Mitch Little 56 Executive Vice President Operations Reginald D. Hedgebeth 52 Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Administrative Officer Patrick J. Wagner 55 Executive Vice President Corporate Development and Strategy Gary E. Wilson 58 Vice President, Controller and Chief Accounting Officer Mr. Tillman was appointed by the board of directors as chairman of the board effective February 1, 2019. In August 2013, he was appointed as president and chief executive officer. Prior to this appointment, Mr. Tillman served as vice president of engineering for ExxonMobil Development Company (a project design and execution company), where he was responsible for all global engineering staff engaged in major project concept selection, front-end design and engineering. Between 2007 and 2010, Mr. Tillman served as North Sea production manager and lead country manager for subsidiaries of ExxonMobil in Stavanger, Norway. Mr. Tillman began his career in the oil and gas industry at Exxon Corporation in 1989 as a research engineer and has extensive operations management and leadership experience. Mr. Whitehead was appointed executive vice president and chief financial officer in March 2017. Prior to this appointment, Mr. Whitehead served as executive vice president and chief financial officer of both EP Energy Corp. and EP Energy LLC (oil and natural gas producer) since May 2012. Between 2009 and 2012, Mr. Whitehead served as senior vice president of strategy and enterprise business development and a member of El Paso Corporation executive committee. He joined El Paso Exploration & Production Company as senior vice president and chief financial officer in 2006. Before joining El Paso, Mr. Whitehead was vice president, controller and chief accounting officer of Burlington Resources Inc. (oil and natural gas producer), and formerly senior vice president and CFO of Burlington Resources Canada. Mr. Little was appointed executive vice president of operations in August 2016 after having served as vice president, conventional since December 2015, vice president international and offshore exploration and production operations since September 2013, and as vice president, international production operations since September 2012. Prior to that, Mr. Little was resident manager of our Norway operations and served as general manager, worldwide drilling and completions. Mr. Little joined Marathon Oil in 1986 and has since held a number of engineering and management positions of increasing responsibility. Mr. Hedgebeth was appointed executive vice president, general counsel and chief administrative officer in August 2019 after having served as senior vice president, general counsel and secretary since April 2017 . Between 2009 and 2017, Mr. Hedgebeth served as general counsel, corporate secretary and chief compliance officer for Spectra Energy Corp (oil and natural gas pipeline company) and general counsel for Spectra Energy Partners, LP. Before joining Spectra Energy, Mr. Hedgebeth 15 served as senior vice president, general counsel and secretary with Circuit City Stores, Inc. (consumer electronics retail company), and vice president of legal for The Home Depot, Inc. (home improvement retail company). Mr. Wagner was appointed executive vice president of corporate development and strategy in November 2017 after having served as senior vice president of corporate development and strategy since March 2017, vice president of corporate development and interim chief financial officer since August 2016 and vice president of corporate development since April 2014. Prior to this appointment, he served as senior vice president, western business unit, for QR Energy LP (an oil and natural gas producer) and the affiliated Quantum Resources Management, which he joined in early 2012 as vice president, exploitation. Prior to that, Mr. Wagner was managing director in Houston for Scotia Waterous, the oil and gas arm of Scotiabank (an international banking services provider), from 2010 to 2012. Before joining Scotia, Mr. Wagner was vice president, Gulf of Mexico, for Devon Energy Corp. (an oil and natural gas producer), having joined Devon in 2003 as manager, international exploitation. Mr. Wilson was appointed vice president, controller and chief accounting officer in October 2014. Prior to joining Marathon Oil, he served in various finance and accounting positions of increasing responsibility at Noble Energy, Inc. (a global exploration and production company) since 2001, including as director corporate accounting from February 2014 through September 2014, director global operations services finance from October 2012 through February 2014, director controls and reporting from April 2011 through September 2012, and international finance manager from September 2009 through March 2011. Available Information Our website is www.marathonoil.com. Our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K and other reports and filings with the SEC are available free of charge on our website as soon as reasonably practicable after the reports are filed or furnished with the SEC. Information contained on our website is not incorporated into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or our other securities filings. Our filings are also available in hard copy, free of charge, by contacting us at 5555 San Felipe Street, Houston, Texas, 77056-2723, Attention: Investor Relations Office, telephone: (713) 629-6600. Additionally, the SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. Additionally, we make available free of charge on our website: our Code of Business Conduct and Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers; our Corporate Governance Principles; and the charters of our Audit and Finance Committee, Compensation Committee, Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee and Health, Environmental, Safety and Corporate Responsibility Committee. 16 Item 1A. Risk Factors We are subject to various risks and uncertainties in the course of our business. The following summarizes significant risks and uncertainties that may adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations. When considering an investment in our securities, you should carefully consider the risk factors included below as well as those matters referenced in the foregoing pages under Disclosures Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and other information included and incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K. A substantial decline in crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices would reduce our operating results and cash flows and could adversely impact our future rate of growth and the carrying value of our assets. The markets for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas have been volatile and are likely to continue to be volatile in the future, causing prices to fluctuate widely. Our revenues, operating results and future rate of growth are highly dependent on the prices we receive for our crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas. Many of the factors influencing prices of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas are beyond our control. These factors include: worldwide and domestic supplies of and demand for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas; the cost of exploring for, developing and producing crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas; the ability of the members of OPEC and certain non-OPEC members, such as Russia, to agree to and maintain production controls; the production levels of non-OPEC countries, including production levels in the shale plays in the United States; the level of drilling, completion and production activities by other exploration and production companies, and variability therein, in response to market conditions; political instability or armed conflict in oil and natural gas producing regions; changes in weather patterns and climate; natural disasters such as hurricanes and tornadoes; the price and availability of alternative and competing forms of energy, such as nuclear, hydroelectric, wind or solar; the effect of conservation efforts; epidemics or pandemics; technological advances affecting energy consumption and energy supply; domestic and foreign governmental regulations and taxes, including further legislation requiring, subsidizing or providing tax benefits for the use of alternative energy sources and fuels; and general economic conditions worldwide. The long-term effects of these and other factors on the prices of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas are uncertain. Historical declines in commodity prices have adversely affected our business by: reducing the amount of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas that we can produce economically; reducing our revenues, operating income and cash flows; causing us to reduce our capital expenditures, and delay or postpone some of our capital projects; requiring us to impair the carrying value of our assets; reducing the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas; and increasing the costs of obtaining capital, such as equity and short- and long-term debt. 17 Estimates of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas reserves depend on many factors and assumptions, including various assumptions that are based on conditions in existence as of the dates of the estimates. Any material changes in those conditions or other factors affecting those assumptions could impair the quantity and value of our reserves. The proved reserve information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K has been derived from engineering and geoscience estimates. Estimates of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas were prepared, in accordance with SEC regulations, by our in-house teams of reservoir engineers and geoscience professionals and were reviewed and approved by our Corporate Reserves Group and third-party consultants. Reserves were valued based on SEC pricing for the periods ended December 31, 2019 , 2018 and 2017 , as well as other conditions in existence at those dates. The table below provides the 2019 SEC pricing for certain benchmark prices: 2019 SEC Pricing WTI Crude oil (per bbl) $ 55.69 Henry Hub natural gas (per mmbtu) $ 2.58 Brent crude oil (per bbl) $ 63.15 Mont Belvieu NGLs (per bbl) $ 18.41 If crude oil prices in the future average below prices used to determine proved reserves at December 31, 2019 , it could have an adverse effect on our estimates of proved reserve volumes and the value of our business. Future reserve revisions could also result from changes in capital funding, drilling plans and governmental regulation, among other things. Reserve estimation is a subjective process that involves estimating volumes to be recovered from underground accumulations of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas that cannot be directly measured. Estimates of economically producible reserves and of future net cash flows depend on a number of variable factors and assumptions, including: location, size and shape of the accumulation as well as fluid, rock and producing characteristics of the accumulation; historical production from the area, compared with production from other analogous producing areas; the assumed impacts of regulation by governmental agencies; assumptions concerning future operating costs, taxes, development costs and workover and repair costs; and industry economic conditions, levels of cash flows from operations and other operating considerations. As a result, different petroleum engineers and geoscientists, each using industry-accepted geologic and engineering practices and scientific methods, may produce different estimates of proved reserves and future net cash flows based on the same available data. Because of the subjective nature of such reserve estimates, each of the following items may differ materially from the estimated amounts: the amount and timing of production; the revenues and costs associated with that production; and the amount and timing of future development expenditures. If we are unsuccessful in acquiring or finding additional reserves, our future crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas production would decline, thereby reducing our cash flows and results of operations and impairing our financial condition. The rate of production from crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas properties generally declines as reserves are depleted. Except to the extent we acquire interests in additional properties containing proved reserves, conduct successful exploration and development activities or, through engineering studies, optimize production performance or identify additional reservoirs not currently producing or secondary recovery reserves, our proved reserves may decline materially as crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas are produced. Accordingly, to the extent we are not successful in replacing the crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas we produce, our future revenues may decline. Creating and maintaining an inventory of prospects for future production depends on many factors, including: obtaining rights to explore for, develop and produce crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas in promising areas; drilling success; the ability to complete projects timely and cost effectively; the ability to find or acquire additional proved reserves at acceptable costs; and 18 the ability to fund such activity. Future exploration and drilling results are uncertain and involve substantial costs. Drilling for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas involves numerous risks, including the risk that we may not encounter commercially productive reservoirs. The costs of drilling, completing and operating wells are often uncertain, and drilling operations may be curtailed, delayed or canceled as a result of a variety of factors, including: unexpected drilling conditions; title problems; pressure or irregularities in formations; equipment failures or accidents; inflation in exploration and drilling costs; fires, explosions, blowouts or surface cratering; lack of, or disruption in, access to pipelines or other transportation methods; and shortages or delays in the availability of services or delivery of equipment. If crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices decrease, it could adversely affect the abilities of our counterparties to perform their obligations to us which could negatively impact our financial results. We often enter into arrangements to conduct certain business operations, such as oil and gas exploration and production, or transportation of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, with partners, co-working interest owners, and other counterparties in order to share risks associated with those operations. In addition, we market our products to a variety of purchasers. If commodity prices decrease, some of our counterparties may experience liquidity problems and may not be able to meet their financial and other obligations to us. The inability of our joint venture partners or co-working interest owners to fund their portion of the costs under our joint venture agreements and joint operating agreements, or the nonperformance by purchasers, contractors or other counterparties of their obligations to us, could negatively impact our operating results and cash flows. If we are unable to complete capital projects at their expected costs and in a timely manner, or if the market conditions assumed in our project economics deteriorate, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be materially and adversely affected. Delays or cost increases related to capital spending programs involving drilling and completion activities, engineering, procurement and construction of facilities (including improvements and repairs to our existing facilities) could adversely affect our ability to achieve forecasted internal rates of return and operating results. Delays in making required changes or upgrades to our facilities could subject us to fines or penalties as well as affect our ability to supply certain products we produce. Such delays or cost increases may arise as a result of unpredictable factors, many of which are beyond our control, including: denial of or delay in receiving requisite regulatory approvals and/or permits; unplanned increases in the cost of construction materials or labor; disruptions in transportation of components or construction materials; increased costs or operational delays resulting from shortages of water; adverse weather conditions, natural disasters or other events (such as equipment malfunctions, explosions, fires or spills) affecting our facilities, or those of vendors or suppliers; shortages of sufficiently skilled labor, or labor disagreements resulting in unplanned work stoppages; market-related increases in a project debt or equity financing costs; and nonperformance by, or disputes with, vendors, suppliers, contractors or subcontractors. Any one or more of these factors could have a significant impact on our capital projects. 19 We may incur substantial capital expenditures and operating costs as a result of compliance with and changes in environmental, health, safety and security law, regulations or requirements or initiatives, including those addressing the impact of global climate change, air emissions or water management, and, as a result, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be materially and adversely affected. Our businesses are currently subject to numerous laws, regulations and other requirements relating to the protection of the environment, including those relating to the discharge of materials into the environment such as the flaring of natural gas, waste management, pollution prevention, greenhouse gas emissions, including carbon dioxide and methane, and the protection of endangered species as well as laws, regulations, and other requirements relating to public and employee safety and health and to facility security. Additionally, states in which we operate may impose additional regulations, legislation, or requirements or begin initiatives addressing the impact of global climate change, air emissions or water management. We have incurred and may continue to incur capital, operating and maintenance, and remediation expenditures as a result of these laws, regulations, and other requirements or initiatives that are being considered or otherwise implemented. To the extent these expenditures, as with all costs, are not ultimately reflected in the prices of our products, our operating results could be adversely affected. The specific impact of these laws, regulations, and other requirements may vary depending on a number of factors, including the age and location of operating facilities and production processes. We may also be required to make material expenditures to modify operations, install pollution control equipment, perform site clean-ups or curtail operations that could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. We may become subject to liabilities that we currently do not anticipate in connection with new, amended or more stringent requirements, stricter interpretations of existing requirements or the future discovery of contamination. In addition, any failure by us to comply with existing or future laws, regulations, and other requirements could result in civil penalties or criminal fines and other enforcement actions against us. We believe it is likely that the scientific and political attention to issues concerning the extent, causes of and responsibility for climate change will continue, with the potential for further regulations that could affect our operations. Our operations result in greenhouse gas emissions. Currently, various legislative or regulatory measures to address greenhouse gas emissions (including carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxides) are in various phases of review, discussion or implementation in the U.S. Internationally, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change finalized an agreement among 195 nations at the 21st Conference of the Parties in Paris with an overarching goal of preventing global temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees Celsius. The agreement includes provisions that every country take some action to lower emissions, but there is no legal requirement for how or by what amount emissions should be lowered. Finalization of new legislation, regulations or international agreements in the future could result in increased costs to operate and maintain our facilities, capital expenditures to install new emission controls at our facilities, and costs to administer and manage any potential greenhouse gas emissions or carbon trading or tax programs. These costs and capital expenditures could be material. Although uncertain, these developments could increase our costs, reduce the demand for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, and create delays in our obtaining air pollution permits for new or modified facilities. The potential adoption of federal, state and local legislative and regulatory initiatives related to hydraulic fracturing could result in increased compliance costs, operating restrictions or delays in the completion of oil and gas wells. Hydraulic fracturing is a commonly used process that involves injecting water, sand, and small volumes of chemicals into the wellbore to fracture the hydrocarbon-bearing rock thousands of feet below the surface to facilitate higher flow of hydrocarbons into the wellbore. Our business uses this technique extensively throughout our U.S. operations. Hydraulic fracturing has been regulated at the state and local level through permitting and compliance requirements. Various state and local-level initiatives in regions with substantial shale resources have been or may be proposed or implemented to further regulate hydraulic fracturing practices, limit water withdrawals and water use, require disclosure of fracturing fluid constituents, restrict which additives may be used, or implement temporary or permanent bans on hydraulic fracturing. In 2015 the BLM issued a rule governing certain hydraulic fracturing practices on lands within their jurisdiction; however, this rule was rescinded in December 2017. This rescission is being judicially challenged before the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California. Increased regulation and attention given to the hydraulic fracturing process could lead to greater opposition, including litigation, to oil and gas activities using hydraulic fracturing techniques. Additional legislation or regulation could also lead to operational delays or increased operating costs in the production of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, including from the shale plays, or could make it more difficult to perform hydraulic fracturing. The adoption of any federal, state or local laws or the implementation of regulations regarding hydraulic fracturing could potentially cause a decrease in the completion of new oil and gas wells and increased compliance costs which could increase costs of our operations and cause considerable delays in acquiring regulatory approvals to drill and complete wells. 20 The potential adoption of federal, state and local legislative and regulatory initiatives intended to address potential induced seismic activity in the areas in which we operate could result in increased compliance costs, operating restrictions or delays in the completion of oil and gas wells. State and federal regulatory agencies have focused on a possible connection between the operation of injection wells used for oil and gas waste disposal and seismic activity. When caused by human activity, such events are called induced seismicity. Separate and apart from the referenced potential connection between injection wells and seismicity, concerns have been raised that hydraulic fracturing activities may be correlated to anomalous seismic events. Marathon uses hydraulic fracturing techniques throughout its U.S. operations. While the scientific community and regulatory agencies at all levels are continuing to study the possible linkage between oil and gas activity and induced seismicity, some state regulatory agencies have modified their regulations or guidance to mitigate potential causes of induced seismicity. For example, Oklahoma has taken numerous regulatory actions in response to concerns related to the operation of produced water disposal wells and induced seismicity, and has issued guidelines to operators in certain areas of the State curtailing injection of produced water due to seismic concerns. Marathon does not currently own or operate injection wells or contract for such services in these areas. Further, Oklahoma issued guidelines to operators for management of anomalous seismicity that may be related to hydraulic fracturing activities in the SCOOP/STACK area. In addition, a number of lawsuits have been filed in Oklahoma alleging damage from seismicity relating to disposal well operations. Marathon has not been named in any of those lawsuits. Increased seismicity in Oklahoma or other areas could result in additional regulation and restrictions on our operations and could lead to operational delays or increased operating costs. Additional regulation and attention given to induced seismicity could also lead to greater opposition, including litigation, to oil and gas activities. Our offshore operations involve special risks that could negatively impact us. Offshore operations present technological challenges and operating risks because of the marine environment. Activities in offshore operations may pose risks because of the physical distance to oilfield service infrastructure and service providers. Environmental remediation and other costs resulting from spills or releases may result in substantial liabilities. Our business could be negatively impacted by cyberattacks targeting our computer and telecommunications systems and infrastructure, or targeting those of our third-party service providers. Our business, like other companies in the oil and gas industry, has become increasingly dependent on digital technologies, including technologies that are managed by third-party service providers on whom we rely to help us collect, host or process information. Such technologies are integrated into our business operations and used as a part of our production and distribution systems in the U.S. and abroad, including those systems used to transport production to market, to enable communications, and to provide a host of other support services for our business. Use of the internet and other public networks for communications, services, and storage, including cloud computing, exposes all users (including our business) to cybersecurity risks. While we and our third-party service providers commit resources to the design, implementation, and monitoring of our information systems, there is no guarantee that our security measures will provide absolute security. Despite these security measures, we may not be able to anticipate, detect, or prevent cyberattacks, particularly because the methodologies used by attackers change frequently or may not be recognized until launched, and because attackers are increasingly using techniques designed to circumvent controls and avoid detection. We and our third-party service providers may therefore be vulnerable to security events that are beyond our control, and we may be the target of cyber-attacks, as well as physical attacks, which could result in information security breaches and significant disruption to our business. Our information systems and related infrastructure have experienced attempted and actual minor breaches of our cybersecurity in the past, but we have not suffered any losses or breaches which had a material effect on our business, operations or reputation relating to such attacks; however, there is no assurance that we will not suffer such losses or breaches in the future. As cyberattacks continue to evolve, we may be required to expend significant additional resources to respond to cyberattacks, to continue to modify or enhance our protective measures, or to investigate and remediate any information systems and related infrastructure security vulnerabilities. We may also be subject to regulatory investigations or litigation relating from cybersecurity issues. 21 Our level of indebtedness may limit our liquidity and financial flexibility. As of December 31, 2019 , our total debt was $5.5 billion , and our next debt maturity is our $1.0 billion 2.8% senior unsecured notes due in 2022. Our indebtedness could have important consequences to our business, including, but not limited to, the following: we may be more vulnerable to general adverse economic and industry conditions; a portion of our cash flows from operating activities must be used to service our indebtedness and is not available for other purposes; our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our industry may be limited; a financial covenant in our Credit Agreement stipulates that our total debt to capitalization ratio will not exceed 65% as of the last day of any fiscal quarter, and if exceeded, may make additional borrowings more expensive and affect our ability to plan for and react to changes in the economy and our industry; we may be at a competitive disadvantage as compared to similar companies that have less debt; and additional financing in the future for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or development activities, general corporate or other purposes may have higher costs and more restrictive covenants. We may incur additional debt in order to fund our capital expenditures, acquisitions or development activities, or for general corporate or other purposes. A higher level of indebtedness increases the risk that our financial flexibility may deteriorate. Our ability to meet our debt obligations and service our debt depends on future performance. General economic conditions, crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices, and financial, business and other factors will affect our operations and our future performance. Many of these factors are beyond our control and we may not be able to generate sufficient cash flow to pay the interest on our debt, and future working capital, borrowings and equity financing may not be available to pay or refinance such debt. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of debt obligations. Difficulty in accessing capital or a significant increase in our costs of accessing capital could adversely affect our business. We receive debt ratings from the major credit rating agencies in the United States. Due to the volatility in crude oil and U.S. natural gas prices in recent years, credit rating agencies review companies in the energy industry periodically, including us. At December 31, 2019 , our corporate credit ratings were: Standard & Poor Global Ratings Services BBB (stable); Fitch Ratings BBB (stable); and Moody Investor Services, Inc. Baa3 (stable). The credit rating process is contingent upon a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control. A downgrade of our credit ratings or other influences, including third-party groups promoting the divestment of fossil fuel equities or pressuring financial services companies to limit or curtail activities with fossil fuel companies, could negatively impact our cost of capital and our ability to access the capital markets, increase the interest rate and fees we pay on our revolving credit facility, and may limit or reduce credit lines with our bank counterparties. We could also be required to post letters of credit or other forms of collateral for certain contractual obligations, which could increase our costs and decrease our liquidity or letter of credit capacity under our unsecured revolving credit facility. Limitations on our ability to access capital could adversely impact the level of our capital spending budget, our ability to manage our debt maturities, or our flexibility to react to changing economic and business conditions. Our commodity price risk management activities may prevent us from fully benefiting from commodity price increases and may expose us to other risks, including counterparty risk. Global commodity prices are volatile. In order to mitigate commodity price volatility and increase the predictability of cash flows related to the marketing of our crude oil, NGLs, and natural gas, we, from time to time, enter into crude oil, NGLS, and natural gas hedging arrangements with respect to a portion of our expected production. While hedging arrangements are intended to mitigate commodity price volatility, we may be prevented from fully realizing the benefits of price increases above the price levels of the derivative instruments used to manage price risk. In addition, our hedging arrangements may expose us to the risk of financial loss in certain circumstances, including instances in which the counterparties to our hedging contracts fail to perform under the contracts. See Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk . Political and economic developments and changes in law or policy could adversely affect our operations and materially reduce our profitability and cash flows. Local political and economic factors in U.S. and global markets could have a material adverse effect on us. We are subject to the political, geographic and economic risks and possible terrorist activities or other armed conflict attendant to doing business within or outside of the U.S. There are also many risks associated with operations in E.G. including the possibility that 22 the government may seize our property with or without compensation, may attempt to renegotiate or revoke existing contractual arrangements or may impose additional taxes or royalty burdens. Changes in the U.S. or global political and economic environment or any U.S. or global hostility or the occurrence or threat of future terrorist attacks, or other armed conflict, could adversely affect the economies of the U.S. and other developed countries. A lower level of economic activity could result in a decline in energy consumption, which could cause our revenues and margins to decline and limit our future growth prospects. These risks could lead to increased volatility in prices for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas. In addition, these risks could increase instability in the financial and insurance markets and make it more difficult for us to access capital and to obtain the insurance coverage that we consider adequate. These risks could also cause damage to, or the inability to access, production facilities or other operating assets and could limit our service and equipment providers ability to deliver items necessary for us to conduct our operations. Actions of governments through tax legislation or interpretations of tax law, and other changes in law, executive order and commercial restrictions could reduce our operating profitability, both in the U.S. and abroad. The U.S. government can prevent or restrict us from doing business in foreign countries. These restrictions and those of foreign governments have in the past limited our ability to operate in, or gain access to, opportunities in various countries and will continue to do so in the future. Changes in U.S. or foreign laws could also adversely affect our results, including new regulations resulting in higher costs to transport our production by pipeline, rail car, truck or vessel or the adoption of government payment transparency regulations that could require us to disclose competitively sensitive commercial information or that could cause us to violate the non-disclosure laws of other countries. Our operations may be adversely affected by pipeline, rail and other transportation capacity constraints. The marketability of our production depends in part on the availability, proximity, and capacity of gathering and transportation pipeline facilities, rail cars, trucks and vessels. If any pipelines, rail cars, trucks or vessels become unavailable, we would, to the extent possible, be required to find a suitable alternative to transport our crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, which could increase the costs and/or reduce the revenues we might obtain from the sale of our production. Both the cost and availability of pipelines, rail cars, trucks, or vessels to transport our production could be adversely impacted by new and expected state or federal regulations relating to transportation of crude oil. If we acquire crude oil and natural gas properties, our failure to fully identify existing and potential problems, to accurately estimate reserves, production rates or costs, or to effectively integrate the acquired properties into our operations could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. We typically seek the acquisition of crude oil and natural gas properties and leases. Although we perform reviews of properties to be acquired in a manner that we believe is diligent and consistent with industry practices, reviews of records and properties may not necessarily reveal existing or potential problems, nor may they permit us to become sufficiently familiar with the properties in order to fully assess possible deficiencies and potential problems. Even when problems with a property are identified, we often assume environmental and other risks and liabilities in connection with acquired properties pursuant to the acquisition agreements. Moreover, there are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of crude oil and natural gas (as previously discussed), actual future production rates and associated costs with respect to acquired properties. Actual reserves, production rates and costs may vary substantially from those assumed in our estimates. In addition, an acquisition may have a material and adverse effect on our business and results of operations, particularly during the periods in which the operations of the acquired properties are being integrated into our ongoing operations or if we are unable to effectively integrate the acquired properties into our ongoing operations. 23 We operate in a highly competitive industry, and many of our competitors are larger and have available resources in excess of our own. The oil and gas industry is highly competitive, and many competitors, including major integrated and independent oil and gas companies, as well as national oil companies, are larger and have substantially greater resources at their disposal than we do. We compete with these companies for the acquisition of oil and natural gas leases and other properties. We also compete with these companies for equipment and personnel, including petroleum engineers, geologists, geophysicists and other specialists, required to develop and operate those properties and in the marketing of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas to end-users. Such competition can significantly increase costs and affect the availability of resources, which could provide our larger competitors a competitive advantage when acquiring equipment, leases and other properties. They may also be able to use their greater resources to attract and retain experienced personnel. Many of our major projects and operations are conducted jointly with other parties, which may decrease our ability to manage risk. We often enter into arrangements to conduct certain business operations, such as oil and gas exploration and production with other parties in order to share risks associated with those operations. However, these arrangements also may decrease our ability to manage risks and costs, particularly where we are not the operator. We could have limited influence over and control of the behaviors and performance of these operations. In addition, misconduct, fraud, noncompliance with applicable laws and regulations or improper activities by or on behalf of one or more of our partners or co-working interest owners could have a significant negative impact on our business and reputation. Our operations are subject to business interruptions and casualty losses. We do not insure against all potential losses and therefore we could be seriously harmed by unexpected liabilities and increased costs. Our United States and International operations are subject to unplanned occurrences, including blowouts, explosions, fires, loss of well control, spills, tornadoes, hurricanes and other adverse weather, tsunamis, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions or nuclear or other disasters, labor disputes and accidents. These same risks can be applied to the third-parties which transport our products from our facilities. A prolonged disruption in the ability of any pipelines, rail cars, trucks, or vessels to transport our production could contribute to a business interruption or increase costs. Our operations are also subject to the additional hazards of pollution, releases of toxic gas and other environmental hazards and risks. These hazards could result in serious personal injury or loss of human life, significant damage to property and equipment, environmental pollution, impairment of operations and substantial losses to us. Various hazards have adversely affected us in the past, and damages resulting from a catastrophic occurrence in the future involving us or any of our assets or operations may result in our being named as a defendant in one or more lawsuits asserting potentially large claims or in our being assessed potentially substantial fines by governmental authorities. We maintain insurance against many, but not all, potential losses or liabilities arising from operating hazards in amounts that we believe to be prudent. Uninsured losses and liabilities arising from operating hazards could reduce the funds available to us for capital, exploration and investment spending and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Historically, we have maintained insurance coverage for physical damage including at times resulting business interruption to our major onshore and offshore facilities, with significant self-insured retentions. In the future, we may not be able to maintain or obtain insurance of the type and amount we desire at reasonable rates. As a result of market conditions, premiums and deductibles for our insurance policies will change over time and could escalate. In some instances, certain insurance could become unavailable or available only for reduced amounts of coverage. Litigation by private plaintiffs or government officials or entities could adversely affect our performance. We currently are defending litigation and anticipate that we will be required to defend new litigation in the future. The subject matter of such litigation may include releases of hazardous substances from our facilities, privacy laws, contract disputes, royalty disputes or any other laws or regulations that apply to our operations. In some cases the plaintiff or plaintiffs seek alleged damages involving large classes of potential litigants, and may allege damages relating to extended periods of time or other alleged facts and circumstances. If we are not able to successfully defend such claims, they may result in substantial liability. We do not have insurance covering all of these potential liabilities. In addition to substantial liability, litigation may also seek injunctive relief which could have an adverse effect on our future operations. For instance, government entities and other groups have filed lawsuits in several states seeking to hold a wide variety of companies that produce fossil fuels liable for the alleged impacts of the greenhouse gas emissions and other alleged harm attributable to those fuels. The lawsuits allege damages as a result of global warming and the plaintiffs are seeking unspecified damages and abatement under various theories. Marathon Oil has been named as a defendant in several of these lawsuits, along with numerous other companies. Similar lawsuits may be filed in other jurisdictions. The ultimate outcome and impact to us 24 cannot be predicted with certainty, and we could incur substantial legal costs associated with defending these and similar lawsuits in the future. Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments None. Item 3. Legal Proceedings We are a defendant in a number of legal and administrative proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business, including, but not limited to, royalty claims, contract claims, tax disputes and environmental claims. While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the resolution of these proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 25 to the consolidated financial statements for a description of such legal and administrative proceedings. Environmental Proceedings The following is a summary of certain proceedings involving us that were pending or contemplated as of December 31, 2019 , under federal and state environmental laws. Government entities have filed lawsuits in several states seeking to hold a wide variety of companies that produce fossil fuels liable for the alleged impacts of the greenhouse gas emissions and other alleged harm attributable to those fuels. The lawsuits allege damages as a result of global warming and the plaintiffs are seeking unspecified damages and abatement under various theories. Marathon Oil has been named as a defendant in several of these lawsuits, along with numerous other companies. Similar lawsuits may be filed in other jurisdictions. While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe that the claims made against us are without merit and will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flow. As of December 31, 2019 , we have sites across the country where remediation is being sought under environmental statutes, both federal and state, or where private parties are seeking remediation through discussions or litigation. Based on currently available information the accrued amount to address the clean-up and remediation costs connected with these sites is not material. In December 2019, we received a Notice of Violation from the North Dakota Department of Environmental Quality and a verbal notice of enforcement in January 2020 from the North Dakota Industrial Commission, related to a release of produced water in North Dakota. In January 2020, we received a Notice of Violation from the EPA related to the Clean Air Act. Each enforcement action will likely result in monetary sanctions in excess of $100,000; however, we do not believe these enforcement actions would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flow. If our assumptions relating to these costs prove to be inaccurate, future expenditures may exceed our accrued amounts. Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures Not applicable. 25 PART II Item 5. Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities The principal market on which Marathon Oil common stock is traded is the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ), and is traded under the trading symbol MRO . As of January 31, 2020 , there were 28,346 registered holders of Marathon Oil common stock. Dividends Our Board of Directors intends to declare and pay dividends on Marathon Oil common stock based on our financial condition and results of operations, although it has no obligation under Delaware law or the restated certificate of incorporation to do so. In determining our dividend policy, the Board of Directors will rely on our consolidated financial statements. Dividends on Marathon Oil common stock are limited to our legally available funds. The following table provides information about purchases by Marathon Oil and its affiliated purchaser, during the quarter ended December 31, 2019 , of equity securities that are registered by Marathon Oil pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: Period Total Number of Shares Purchased (a) Average Price Paid per Share Total Number of Shares Purchased as Part of Publicly Announced Plans or Programs (b) Approximate Dollar Value of Shares that May Yet Be Purchased Under the Plans or Programs (b) 10/01/2019 - 10/31/2019 1,619,594 $ 11.65 1,567,951 $ 1,452,022,646 11/01/2019 - 11/30/2019 155,575 $ 11.56 150,386 $ 1,450,286,198 12/01/2019 - 12/31/2019 3,515,651 $ 12.86 3,514,490 $ 1,405,076,614 Total 5,290,820 $ 12.45 5,232,827 (a) 57,993 shares of restricted stock were delivered by employees to Marathon Oil, upon vesting, to satisfy tax withholding requirements. (b) In January 2006, we announced a $2 billion share repurchase program. Our Board of Directors subsequently increased the authorization for repurchases under the program by $500 million in January 2007, by $500 million in May 2007, by $2 billion in July 2007, by $1.2 billion in December 2013 and by $950 million in July 2019 for a total authorized amount of $7.2 billion. Purchases under the program are made at our discretion and may be in either open market transactions, including block purchases, or in privately negotiated transactions using cash on hand, cash generated from operations, proceeds from potential asset sales or cash from available borrowings to acquire shares. This program may be changed based upon our financial condition or changes in market conditions and is subject to termination by the Board of Directors prior to completion. Shares repurchased as of December 31, 2019 were held as treasury stock. 26 Item 6. Selected Financial Data Year Ended December 31, (In millions, except per share data) 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 Statement of Income Data (a) Total revenues and other income $ 5,190 $ 6,582 $ 4,765 $ 3,787 $ 4,953 Income (loss) from continuing operations 480 1,096 (830 ) (2,087 ) (1,701 ) Discontinued operations (b) (4,893 ) (53 ) (503 ) Net income (loss) 480 1,096 (5,723 ) (2,140 ) (2,204 ) Per Share Data (a) Basic: Income (loss) from continuing operations $ 0.59 $ 1.30 $ (0.97 ) $ (2.55 ) $ (2.51 ) Discontinued operations (b) $ $ $ (5.76 ) $ (0.06 ) $ (0.75 ) Net income (loss) $ 0.59 $ 1.30 $ (6.73 ) $ (2.61 ) $ (3.26 ) Diluted: Income (loss) from continuing operations $ 0.59 $ 1.29 $ (0.97 ) $ (2.55 ) $ (2.51 ) Discontinued operations (b) $ $ $ (5.76 ) $ (0.06 ) $ (0.75 ) Net income (loss) $ 0.59 $ 1.29 $ (6.73 ) $ (2.61 ) $ (3.26 ) Statement of Cash Flows Data Additions to property, plant and equipment related to continuing operations $ (2,550 ) $ (2,753 ) $ (1,974 ) $ (1,204 ) $ (3,485 ) Dividends paid (162 ) (169 ) (170 ) (162 ) (460 ) Dividends per share $ 0.20 $ 0.20 $ 0.20 $ 0.20 $ 0.68 Balance Sheet Data at December 31 Total assets $ 20,245 $ 21,321 $ 22,012 $ 31,094 $ 32,311 Total long-term debt, including capitalized leases 5,501 5,499 5,494 6,581 7,268 Leases: (c) ROU asset 199 Current portion of long-term lease liability 101 62 29 30 31 Long-term lease liability 107 155 90 146 147 (a) December 31, 2016 includes the increase of a valuation allowance on certain of our deferred tax assets for $1,346 million . (b) We closed on the sale of our Canada business in 2017 and have reflected this business as Discontinued Operations in the periods presented. (c) Note the prospective adoption of the lease accounting standard on January 1, 2019. Therefore, current and long-term portions for leases in years 2018 through 2015 do not reflect adoption of the new lease accounting standard. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2 and Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. Supplemental information affecting comparability of selected financial data is shown below. Year Ended December 31, (In millions) 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 Proved property impairment $ 24 $ 75 $ 229 $ 67 $ 381 Unproved property impairment 98 208 246 195 655 Goodwill impairment 340 27 Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information under Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and the other financial information found elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that involve certain risks and uncertainties. See Disclosures Regarding Forward-Looking Statements (immediately prior to Part I) and Item 1A. Risk Factors . Each of our two reportable operating segments are organized by geographic location and managed according to the nature of the products and services offered. United States explores for, produces and markets crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas in the United States; International explores for, produces and markets crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas outside of the United States and produces and markets products manufactured from natural gas, such as LNG and methanol, in E.G. Executive Overview We are an independent exploration and production company based in Houston, Texas. Our strategy is to deliver competitive and improving corporate level returns by focusing our capital investment in the lower cost, higher margin U.S. resource plays (the Eagle Ford in Texas, the Bakken in North Dakota, STACK and SCOOP in Oklahoma and Northern Delaware in New Mexico). We will continue to be guided by maintaining a strong balance sheet, prioritizing sustainable cash flow over a wide range of commodity prices and returning capital to shareholders. Key 2019 highlights include: Simplifying and concentrating our portfolio In the first quarter of 2019, we closed the sale of our working interest in the Droshky field (Gulf of Mexico) for a pre-tax gain of $42 million. In the second quarter of 2019, we closed on the sale of our 15% non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan for proceeds of $63 million, before closing adjustments. In July 2019, we closed on the sale of our U.K. business for proceeds of approximately $95 million , reflecting the assumption by the buyer of working capital and cash equivalent balances, asset retirement obligations of $966 million, as well as pension obligations. In the third quarter of 2019, we secured a 25% non-operated working interest partner in our Louisiana Austin Chalk acreage. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we acquired approximately 18,000 net acres in the Eagle Ford for $191 million and approximately 40,000 acres in a Texas Delaware oil play in West Texas for $106 million . Strengthened balance sheet and liquidity In July 2019, the Board of Directors authorized a $950 million increase to our share purchase program. During 2019 , we returned additional capital to shareholders by acquiring 24 million of common shares at a cost of $345 million , with $1.4 billion of repurchase authorization remaining at year-end. Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations decreased by 15% , compared to the same period last year, to $2.7 billion primarily as a result of decreased commodity price realizations. During the fourth quarter 2019, completed three leverage neutral finance transactions that extend maturities, generate annual cash cost savings, and reflect our commitment to maintaining a strong balance sheet and investment grade credit ratings at all primary rating agencies. Financial and operational results Total net sales volumes for the year were 414 mboed, including 323 mboed in the U.S. Our U.S. net sales volumes increase d 8% and our wells to sales increased 11% compared to 2018 . Added proved reserves of 110 mmboe for a reserve replacement ratio of 74% . Our net income per share from continuing operations was $0.59 in 2019 as compared to a net income per share of $1.30 last year. Included in 2019 net income are: A decrease in revenues of approximately 14% compared to 2018 , as a result of decreased commodity price realizations and lower net sales volumes in our International segment due to dispositions, partially offset by 28 increased net sales volumes in the U.S. Our net gain on disposal of assets decreased $269 million in 2019 primarily due to the sale of our Libya subsidiary for a pre-tax gain of $255 million in 2018. Exploration and impairment expenses decreased by $191 million to $173 million , year over year, primarily a result of non-cash impairment charges on proved and unproved properties in the prior year. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail. Production expense decreased 15% during 2019 as a result of dispositions in our International segment and our focus on reducing costs in our U.S. resource plays. Income tax benefit was $88 million in 2019 primarily as a result of the $126 million settlement of the 2010-2011 U.S. Federal Tax Audit, primarily related to AMT credits. See Consolidated Results of Operations: 2019 compared to 2018 section below and Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 8 and Note 25 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail. Outlook Capital Budget On February 12, 2020 , we announced our total 2020 Capital Budget of $2.4 billion , which includes $2.2 billion of development capital and $200 million to fund REx. Our 2020 development capital budget is weighted towards the four U.S. resource plays with approximately 70% allocated to the Eagle Ford and Bakken and the remaining allocated between the Northern Delaware and Oklahoma. Our 2020 Capital Budget is broken down by reportable segment in the table below: (In millions) Capital Budget United States (a) $ 2,370 International and corporate other (b) 30 Total Capital Budget $ 2,400 (a) Includes approximately $200 million of spend to fund REx. (b) International and corporate other includes our International segment and other corporate items. Operations Net sales volumes increased by 8% in 2019 in the U.S. segment with new wells to sales across the U.S. resource plays. The International segment had lower net sales volumes in 2019 as a result of dispositions and natural decline in E.G. The following table presents a summary of our sales volumes for each of our segments (refer to the Results of Operations section for a price-volume analysis for each of the segments). Net Sales Volumes 2019 Increase (Decrease) 2018 Increase (Decrease) 2017 United States (mboed) 323 8 % 298 27 % 234 International (mboed) (a) 91 (25 )% 122 (16 )% 145 Total continuing operations (mboed) 414 (1 )% 420 11 % 379 (a) We closed on the sale of our Libya subsidiary in the first quarter of 2018, our interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan in the second quarter of 2019 and our U.K. business in the third quarter of 2019. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on dispositions. 29 United States Net sales volumes in the segment were higher during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of new wells to sales in our U.S. resource plays. The following tables provide additional details regarding net sales volumes, sales mix and operational drilling activity for our significant operations within this segment: Net Sales Volumes 2019 Increase (Decrease) 2018 Increase (Decrease) 2017 Equivalent Barrels (mboed) Eagle Ford 106 (2 )% 108 7 % 101 Bakken 103 23 % 84 50 % 56 Oklahoma 78 5 % 74 37 % 54 Northern Delaware 28 40 % 20 233 % 6 Other United States 8 (33 )% 12 (29 )% 17 Total United States (mboed) 323 8 % 298 27 % 234 Sales Mix - U.S. Resource Plays - 2019 Eagle Ford Bakken Oklahoma Northern Delaware Total Crude oil and condensate 59% 84% 27% 58% 59% Natural gas liquids 21% 9% 28% 20% 18% Natural gas 20% 7% 45% 22% 23% Drilling Activity - U.S. Resource Plays 2019 2018 2017 Gross Operated Eagle Ford: Wells drilled to total depth 127 123 182 Wells brought to sales 146 149 157 Bakken: Wells drilled to total depth 73 78 90 Wells brought to sales 105 80 39 Oklahoma: Wells drilled to total depth 68 55 86 Wells brought to sales 69 57 73 Northern Delaware: Wells drilled to total depth 51 69 27 Wells brought to sales 54 52 18 Eagle Ford In 2019 , our net sales volumes were 106 mboed including oil sales of 63 mbbld . We brought 146 gross company-operated wells to sales across Karnes, Atascosa, and Gonzales counties with strong initial production rates. The third and fourth quarters of 2019 represented the two strongest quarters in the history of the asset on a 30-day initial production basis for oil. Eagle Ford fourth quarter oil mix increased to 63%, up from 57% in the prior-year quarter. Completed well costs during fourth quarter averaged $5.1 million, or 8% below the 2018 average. Bakken In 2019 , our net sales volumes of 103 mboed with oil sales volume of 86 mbbld . We brought 105 gross company-operated wells to sales in 2019 . Fourth quarter 2019 was characterized by strong operations with the asset establishing new quarterly records for both drilling feet per day and completion stages per day. We continue to deliver capital efficiency and accretive financial returns, highlighted by a recent four-well pad in Myrmidon at an average completed well cost of $4.3 million. Wells to sales during the fourth quarter 2019 had an average completed well cost below $5 million, 17% below the 2018 average. Oklahoma In 2019 , our net sales volumes were 78 mboed including oil sales volumes of 21 mbbld. During the fourth quarter, oil mix rose to 29% in 2019 from 24% in the fourth quarter 2018. We brought 69 gross company-operated wells to sales in 2019 , including nine wells targeting the Springer formation in the SCOOP in the fourth quarter 2019. The nine Springer wells are demonstrating solid productivity. 30 Northern Delaware Our 2019 net sales volumes were 28 mboed with oil sales volumes of 16 mbbld . We brought 54 gross company-operated wells to sales, with a focus on the delineation of our Red Hills acreage in 2019. Since this transition to Red Hills delineation, we have brought online nine Upper Wolfcamp wells and four Bone Spring wells. We continue to advance learnings, reduce cost structure, and improve margins, exiting the year with about 90% of water and oil on pipe. International Net sales volumes in the segment were lower during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to E.G. planned maintenance activities and natural field decline, coupled with the dispositions of our U.K. business and our non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan. The following table provides details regarding net sales volumes for our significant operations within this segment: Net Sales Volumes 2019 Increase (Decrease) 2018 Increase (Decrease) 2017 Equivalent Barrels (mboed) Equatorial Guinea 85 (12 )% 97 (11 )% 109 United Kingdom (a) 5 (62 )% 13 (7 )% 14 Libya (100 )% 8 (60 )% 20 Other International 1 (75 )% 4 100 % 2 Total International 91 (25 )% 122 (16 )% 145 Equity Method Investees LNG (mtd) 4,933 (15 )% 5,805 (10 )% 6,423 Methanol (mtd) 1,082 (13 )% 1,241 (10 )% 1,374 Condensate and LPG (boed) 11,104 (15 )% 13,034 (10 )% 14,501 (a) Includes natural gas acquired for injection and subsequent resale. Equatorial Guinea Net sales volumes in 2019 were lower than 2018 as a result of the planned triennial turnaround completed in 2019 and natural field decline. United Kingdom During 2019, we closed on the sale of our U.K. business. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. Libya During the first quarter of 2018, we closed on the sale of our subsidiary in Libya. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. Equity Method Investees Net sales volumes in 2019 are tied to the volumes in Equatorial Guinea which were lower in the current year as noted above. Market Conditions Crude oil and condensate and NGLs benchmarks decreased in 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018 . As a result, we experienced decreased price realizations associated with those benchmarks. We continue to expect crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas benchmark prices to remain volatile based on global supply and demand, which will result in increases or decreases in our price realizations during 2020 . See Item 1A. Risk Factors and Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition Critical Accounting Estimates for further discussion of how declines in these commodity prices could impact us. 31 United States The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmarks for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas for 2019 , 2018 and 2017 . 2019 Increase (Decrease) 2018 Increase (Decrease) 2017 Average Price Realizations (a) Crude oil and condensate (per bbl) (b) $ 55.80 (12 )% $ 63.11 28 % $ 49.35 Natural gas liquids (per bbl) 14.22 (42 )% 24.54 19 % 20.55 Natural gas (per mcf) (c) 2.18 (18 )% 2.65 (7 )% 2.84 Benchmarks WTI crude oil average of daily prices (per bbl) $ 57.04 (12 )% $ 64.90 28 % $ 50.85 Magellan East Houston ( MEH ) crude oil average of daily prices (per bbl) (d) 61.96 LLS crude oil average of daily prices (per bbl) (d) 70.04 30 % 54.04 Mont Belvieu NGLs (per bbl) (e) 17.81 (33 )% 26.75 21 % 22.04 Henry Hub natural gas settlement date average (per mmbtu) 2.63 (15 )% 3.09 (1 )% 3.11 (a) Excludes gains or losses on commodity derivative instruments. (b) Inclusion of realized gains (losses) on crude oil derivative instruments would have impacted average price realizations by $0.67 per bbl, $(4.60) per bbl, and $0.75 per bbl for 2019 , 2018 , and 2017 . (c) Inclusion of realized gains (losses) on natural gas derivative instruments would have a minimal impact on average price realizations for the periods presented. (d) Benchmark change due to industry shift to MEH in the first quarter of 2019 . (e) Bloomberg Finance LLP: Y-grade Mix NGL of 55% ethane, 25% propane, 5% butane, 8% isobutane and 7% natural gasoline. Crude oil and condensate Price realizations may differ from benchmarks due to the quality and location of the product. Natural gas liquids The majority of our sales volumes are at reference to Mont Belvieu prices. Natural gas A significant portion of volumes are sold at bid-week prices, or first-of-month indices relative to our producing areas. International The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmark for crude oil for 2019 , 2018 and 2017 . 2019 Increase (Decrease) 2018 Increase (Decrease) 2017 Average Price Realizations Crude oil and condensate (per bbl) $ 53.09 (17 )% $ 64.25 21 % $ 53.05 Natural gas liquids (per bbl) 1.40 (38 )% 2.27 (28 )% 3.15 Natural gas (per mcf) 0.33 (39 )% 0.54 (2 )% 0.55 Benchmark Brent (Europe) crude oil (per bbl) (a) $ 64.36 (9 )% $ 71.06 31 % $ 54.25 (a) Average of monthly prices obtained from the United States Energy Information Agency website. United Kingdom Crude oil and condensate Generally sold in relation to the Brent crude benchmark. We closed on the sale of our U.K. business on July 1, 2019. Equatorial Guinea Crude oil and condensate Alba Field liquids production is primarily condensate and generally sold in relation to the Brent crude benchmark. Alba Plant LLC processes the rich hydrocarbon gas which is supplied by the Alba Field under a 32 fixed-price long term contract. Alba Plant LLC extracts NGLs and secondary condensate which is then sold by Alba Plant LLC at market prices, with our share of the revenue reflected in income from equity method investments on the consolidated statements of income. Alba Plant LLC delivers the processed dry natural gas to the Alba Field for distribution and sale to AMPCO and EG LNG. Natural gas liquids Wet gas is sold to Alba Plant LLC at a fixed-price term contract resulting in realized prices not tracking market price. Alba Plant LLC extracts and keeps NGLs, which are sold at market price, with our share of income from Alba Plant LLC being reflected in the income from equity method investments on the consolidated statements of income. Natural gas Dry natural gas, processed by Alba Plant LLC on behalf of the Alba Field, is sold by the Alba Field to EG LNG and AMPCO at fixed-price long term contracts resulting in realized prices not tracking market price. We derive additional value from the equity investment in our downstream gas processing units EG LNG and AMPCO. EG LNG sells LNG on a market-based long term contract and AMPCO markets methanol at market prices. Consolidated Results of Operations: 2019 compared to 2018 Revenues from contracts with customers are presented by segment in the table below: Year Ended December 31, (In millions) 2019 2018 Revenues from contracts with customers United States $ 4,602 $ 4,886 International 461 1,016 Segment revenues from contracts with customers $ 5,063 $ 5,902 Below is a price/volume analysis for each segment. Refer to the preceding Operations and Market Conditions sections for additional detail related to our net sales volumes and average price realizations. Increase (Decrease) Related to (In millions) Year Ended December 31, 2018 Price Realizations Net Sales Volumes Year Ended December 31, 2019 United States Price/Volume Analysis Crude oil and condensate $ 3,947 $ (510 ) $ 450 $ 3,887 Natural gas liquids 495 (223 ) 35 307 Natural gas 413 (75 ) 11 349 Other sales 31 59 Total $ 4,886 $ 4,602 International Price/Volume Analysis Crude oil and condensate $ 888 $ (83 ) $ (407 ) $ 398 Natural gas liquids 9 (3 ) (1 ) 5 Natural gas 86 (29 ) (13 ) 44 Other sales 33 14 Total $ 1,016 $ 461 Net loss on commodity derivatives increased $58 million in 2019 from 2018 . We have multiple crude oil and natural gas derivative contracts indexed to NYMEX WTI and Henry Hub. We record commodity derivative gains/losses as the respective index pricing and forward curves change each period. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. Income from equity method investments decreased $138 million as a result of lower price realizations and lower net sales volumes due to the 2019 triennial turnaround in E.G. and natural decline of the Alba field which resulted in lower net sales volumes for equity method investments. Net gain on disposal of assets decreased $269 million in 2019 from 2018 . This decrease was primarily related to the 2018 sale of our Libya subsidiary for a pre-tax gain of $255 million . See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for information about these dispositions. 33 Other income decreased $88 million in 2019 from 2018 primarily due to the 2018 reduction of our U.K. asset retirement obligation, versus the 2019 indemnification of certain tax liabilities in connection with the closure of the 2010-2011 Federal Tax Audit with the IRS. This indemnity relates to tax and interest allocable to MPC as a result of the IRS Audit in accordance with the Tax Sharing Agreement. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for detail about our asset retirement obligation. Production expenses decreased $130 million during 2019 from 2018 . The International segment decreased $89 million primarily due to dispositions, which included the sale of our U.K. business on July 1, 2019. Our United States segment decreased $37 million primarily due to reduced water hauling costs with more water on pipe in the Northern Delaware and non-core asset dispositions in the Gulf of Mexico during 2018, slightly offset by increased water handling in Bakken due to more producing wells in 2019 than in 2018 . The production expense rate (per boe) declined during 2019 in the United States as a result of continued focus on cost reduction as well as higher net sales volumes. The following table provides production expense and production expense rates for each segment: (In millions/$ per boe) 2019 2018 Increase (Decrease) 2019 2018 Increase (Decrease) Production Expense and Production Expense Rate Expense Rate United States $ 588 $ 625 (6 )% $ 4.98 $ 5.75 (13 )% International $ 126 $ 215 (41 )% $ 3.76 $ 4.86 (23 )% Shipping, handling and other operating expenses increased $30 million in 2019 from 2018 primarily as a result of increased sales volumes in our United States segment, partially offset by the sale of our U.K. business in the International segment. Exploration expenses decreased $140 million during 2019 versus the comparable 2018 . Decreases in unproved property impairments were driven by changes in impairment assumptions based on actual development experience. Also in 2018, there was $32 million of dry well costs and $16 million in unproved property impairments related to the Rodo well in Alba Block Sub Area B, offshore E.G. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for details of these items. The following table summarizes the components of exploration expenses: Year Ended December 31, (In millions) 2019 2018 Increase (Decrease) Exploration Expenses Unproved property impairments $ 98 $ 208 (53 )% Dry well costs 16 47 (66 )% Geological and geophysical 18 21 (14 )% Other 17 13 31 % Total exploration expenses $ 149 $ 289 (48 )% Depreciation, depletion and amortization decreased $44 million in 2019 from 2018 primarily as a result of dispositions which included the sale of our U.K. business and the sale of certain non-core asset dispositions in our United States segment. Adding to the decrease were lower 2019 production volumes in E.G. Our segments apply the units-of-production method to the majority of their assets, including capitalized asset retirement costs; therefore, volumes have an impact on DD&A expense. The DD&A rate (per boe), which is impacted by field-level changes in reserves, capitalized costs and sales volumes, can also impact our DD&A expense. The DD&A rate for International decreased primarily as a result of dispositions. Our United States DD&A rate decreased in 2019 primarily due to reserve additions as well as non-core asset dispositions in 2018 . 34 The following table provides DD&A expense and DD&A expense rates for each segment: (In millions/$ per boe) 2019 2018 Increase (Decrease) 2019 2018 Increase (Decrease) DD&A Expense and DD&A Expense Rate Expense Rate United States $ 2,250 $ 2,217 1 % $ 19.07 $ 20.39 (6 )% International $ 121 $ 197 (39 )% $ 3.61 $ 4.44 (19 )% Impairments decreased $51 million in 2019 from 2018 as a result of lower anticipated sales of certain non-core proved properties in our International and United States segments in the current period. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 11 to the consolidated financial statement for detail of proved property impairments each year. General and administrative expenses decreased $38 million in 2019 compared to 2018 . This was primarily the result of decreased compensation costs. Provision (benefit) for income taxes reflects an effective tax benefit rate of 22% for 2019 , as compared to an effective income tax expense rate of 23% for 2018 . See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the effective income tax rate. Segment Results: 2019 compared to 2018 Segment Income Segment income represents income which excludes certain items not allocated to our operating segments, net of income taxes. A portion of our corporate and operations general and administrative support costs are not allocated to the operating segments. These unallocated costs primarily consist of employment costs (including pension effects), professional services, facilities and other costs associated with corporate and operations support activities. Additionally, items which affect comparability such as: gains or losses on dispositions, certain property impairments, certain exploration expenses relating to a strategic decision to exit conventional exploration, unrealized gains or losses on commodity derivative instruments, pension settlement losses or other items (as determined by the CODM) are not allocated to operating segments. The following table reconciles segment income to net income: Year Ended December 31, (In millions) 2019 2018 Increase (Decrease) United States $ 675 $ 608 11 % International 233 473 (51 )% Segment income 908 1,081 (16 )% Items not allocated to segments, net of income taxes (a) (428 ) 15 (2,953 )% Net income $ 480 $ 1,096 (56 )% (a) See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail about items not allocated to segments. United States segment income increased $67 million after-tax in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to a net gain on commodity derivatives in 2019 versus net loss on commodity derivatives in 2018 , as well as lower exploration costs. This increase was partially offset by lower price realizations along with increases in certain expenses as a result of higher net sales volumes. International segment income decreased $240 million after-tax in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to lower income from our equity method investments and our operations in E.G. as a result of lower sales volumes and price realizations, offset by lower costs and taxes due to dispositions. Sales volumes decreased due to the planned triennial turnaround in E.G. completed in the first quarter 2019 and natural field decline in E.G. The income decrease was also attributed to dispositions of our U.K. business and our non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan. 35 Consolidated Results of Operations: 2018 compared to 2017 A detailed discussion of the year-over-year changes from the year ended December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2017 can be found in the Management Discussion and Analysis section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition, Cash Flows and Liquidity Commodity prices are the most significant factor impacting our operating cash flows and the amount of capital available to reinvest into the business. In 2019 , we experienced a decrease in operating cash flows primarily as a result of lower commodity realizations, of which crude oil and condensate price realizations decreased by 12% to $ 55.54 per barrel. During 2019 our cash flow highlights include: We returned capital to shareholders by executing $345 million of share repurchases along with $162 million in dividend payments. Asset acquisitions during the year of $293 million were paid with cash on hand. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $604 million to $858 million at December 31, 2019 . During the fourth quarter, we completed three leverage neutral finance transactions which extend maturities and generate annual cash savings. At December 31, 2019 , we had approximately $3.9 billion of liquidity consisting of $858 million in cash and cash equivalents and $3.0 billion available under our revolving credit facility. In September 2019, we entered into an amendment to our Credit Facility to reduce the maximum borrowing from $3.4 billion to $3.0 billion and extended the maturity date by one year to May 28, 2023. As previously discussed in the Outlook section, we are targeting a $2.4 billion Capital Budget for 2020 . We believe our current liquidity level, cash flow from operations and ability to access the capital markets provides us with the flexibility to fund our business across a wide range of commodity price environments. Cash Flows The following table presents sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for 2019 and 2018 : Year Ended December 31, (In millions) 2019 2018 Sources of cash and cash equivalents Operating activities $ 2,749 $ 3,234 Disposal of assets, net of cash transferred to the buyer (76 ) 1,264 Borrowings 600 Other 65 93 Total sources of cash and cash equivalents $ 3,338 $ 4,591 Uses of cash and cash equivalents Additions to property, plant and equipment $ (2,550 ) $ (2,753 ) Additions to other assets 36 (26 ) Acquisitions, net of cash acquired (293 ) (25 ) Purchases of common stock (362 ) (713 ) Debt repayments (600 ) Dividends paid (162 ) (169 ) Other (11 ) (6 ) Total uses of cash and cash equivalents $ (3,942 ) $ (3,692 ) Cash flows generated from operating activities in 2019 were 15% lower as commodity price realizations decreased 13% along with lower net sales volumes in our International segment as a result of E.G. planned maintenance and natural field decline, coupled with dispositions. 36 Disposals of assets in 2019 were primarily related to proceeds, net of the cash transferred to the buyer, with the sale of our U.K. business; partially offset by the proceeds received from the sale of a 25% non-operated working interest in the Louisiana Austin Chalk as well as the sale of our non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan. Proceeds from the disposals of assets for 2018 are primarily related to our non-operated interest in Libya, as well as the remaining proceeds from the sale of our Canadian business. Disposition transactions are discussed in further detail in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. Additions to property, plant and equipment in 2019 totaled $2.6 billion , consistent with expectations (last year, we communicated our $2.6 billion Capital Budget consisted of $2.4 billion in development capital and $200 million to fund resource play exploration. The following table shows capital expenditures by segment and reconciles to additions to property, plant and equipment as presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows: Year Ended December 31, (In millions) 2019 2018 United States (a) $ 2,550 $ 2,620 International 16 39 Corporate 25 26 Total capital expenditures 2,591 2,685 Change in capital expenditure accrual (a) (41 ) 68 Total use of cash and cash equivalents for property, plant and equipment $ 2,550 $ 2,753 (a) The change in capital expenditure accrual includes activity for assets classified as held for sale for the years presented. Additions to other assets relates to deposits on our resource play exploration program. In the fourth quarter 2019, we acquired approximately 18,000 net acres in the Eagle Ford for $191 million and approximately 40,000 acres in a Texas Delaware oil play in West Texas for $106 million . During the fourth quarter 2019, we completed two separate financing transactions resulting in a debt borrowing of $600 million and debt repayment of $600 million, which is further discussed in the Capital Resources section below. Also see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for details of these items During 2019 and 2018 , the Board of Directors approved a $0.05 per share quarterly dividend. See Capital Requirements below for additional information about the fourth quarter 2019 dividend. Available Liquidity In September 2019, we entered into an amendment to our Credit Facility to reduce the maximum borrowing from $3.4 billion to $3.0 billion and extended the maturity date by one year to May 28, 2023. Our main sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, internally generated cash flow from operations, sales of non-core assets, capital market transactions, and our revolving Credit Facility. At December 31, 2019 , we had approximately $3.9 billion of liquidity consisting of $858 million in cash and cash equivalents and $3.0 billion available under our revolving Credit Facility. Our working capital requirements are supported by these sources and we may issue either commercial paper backed by our revolving Credit Facility or draw on our revolving credit facility to meet short-term cash requirements, or issue debt or equity securities through the shelf registration statement discussed below as part of our longer-term liquidity and capital management program. Because of the alternatives available to us as discussed above, we believe that our short-term and long-term liquidity are adequate to fund not only our current operations, but also our near-term and long-term funding requirements including our capital spending programs, dividend payments, defined benefit plan contributions, repayment of debt maturities, and other amounts that may ultimately be paid in connection with contingencies. General economic conditions, commodity prices, and financial, business and other factors could affect our operations and our ability to access the capital markets. Our corporate credit ratings as of December 31, 2019 are: Standard & Poor Ratings Services BBB (stable); Fitch Ratings BBB (stable); and Moody Investor Services, Inc. Baa3 (stable). We are rated investment grade at all three primary credit rating agencies. In addition, we also have the ability to borrow on our U.S. commercial paper program, which is backed by the revolving credit facility. A downgrade in our credit ratings could increase our future cost of financing or limit our ability to access capital, and result in additional collateral requirements. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of how a downgrade in our credit ratings could affect us. 37 We may incur additional debt in order to fund our capital expenditures, acquisitions or development activities, or for general corporate or other purposes. A higher level of indebtedness could increase the risk that our liquidity and financial flexibility deteriorates. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for a further discussion of how our level of indebtedness could affect us. Capital Resources Credit Arrangements and Borrowings At December 31, 2019 , we had no borrowings against our Credit Facility or under our U.S. commercial paper program that is backed by the Credit Facility. At December 31, 2019 , we had $5.5 billion in long-term debt outstanding. We do not have any triggers on any of our corporate debt that would cause an event of default in the case of a downgrade of our credit ratings. On October 1, 2019, we closed a $600 million remarketing to investors of sub-series A bonds which are part of the $1.0 billion St. John the Baptist, State of Louisiana revenue refunding bonds originally issued and purchased in December 2017. The $600 million in proceeds from the conversion and remarketing were used to pay the purchase price of our converted 2017 bonds on the closing date. We continue to own the remaining $400 million of the revenue refunding bonds and have the right to convert and remarket them to investors at any time up to the 2037 maturity date. On October 3, 2019, we redeemed our $600 million 2.7% senior unsecured notes due June 2020. Our next debt maturity is the $1.0 billion 2.8% senior unsecured notes due 2022. Shelf Registration We have a universal shelf registration statement filed with the SEC under which we, as a well-known seasoned issuer for purposes of SEC rules, have the ability to issue and sell an indeterminate amount of various types of debt and equity securities. Asset Disposals In the third quarter of 2019, we closed on the sale of our U.K. business for proceeds of approximately $95 million , reflecting the assumption by the buyer of working capital and cash equivalent balances, asset retirement obligations of $966 million, as well as the pension obligations. In the second quarter of 2019, we closed on the sale of our 15% non-operated interest in the Atrush block in Kurdistan for proceeds of $63 million , before closing adjustments. Disposition transactions are discussed in further detail in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. Debt-To-Capital Ratio The Credit Facility includes a covenant requiring that our ratio of total debt to total capitalization not exceed 65% as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. Our debt-to-capital ratio was 31% at both December 31, 2019 and 2018 . Capital Requirements Capital Spending Our approved Capital Budget for 2020 is $2.4 billion . Additional details were previously discussed in Outlook . Share Repurchase Program In 2019 , we acquired approximately 24 million common shares at a cost of $345 million under our share repurchase program with remaining share repurchase authorization as of December 31, 2019 of $1.4 billion . Other Expected Cash Outflows On January 29, 2020 , our Board of Directors approved a dividend of $0.05 per share for the fourth quarter of 2019 . The dividend is payable on March 10, 2020 to shareholders of record on February 19, 2020 . We plan to make contributions of up to $28 million to our funded pension plans during 2020 . Cash contributions to be paid from our general assets for the unfunded pension and postretirement plans are expected to be approximately $6 million and $18 million in 2020 . 38 Contractual Cash Obligations The table below provides aggregated information on our consolidated obligations to make future payments under existing contracts as of December 31, 2019 . (In millions) Total 2020 2021- 2022 2023- 2024 Later Years Short and long-term debt (includes interest) (a) $ 8,320 $ 252 $ 1,538 $ 1,016 $ 5,514 Lease obligations (b) 276 114 98 6 58 Purchase obligations: Oil and gas activities (c) 52 42 2 1 7 Service and materials contracts (d) 126 69 54 3 Transportation and related contracts 1,872 225 520 476 651 Other (e) 33 29 4 Total purchase obligations 2,083 365 580 480 658 Other long-term liabilities reported in the consolidated balance sheet (f) 410 32 52 48 278 Total contractual cash obligations (g) $ 11,089 $ 763 $ 2,268 $ 1,550 $ 6,508 (a) Includes anticipated cash payments for interest of $252 million for 2020 , $503 million for 2021 - 2022 , $415 million for 2023 - 2024 and $1.6 billion for the remaining years for a total of $2.8 billion . (b) Includes project costs incurred as of December 31, 2019 for new build-to-suit office building in Houston, Texas. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements section below. (c) Oil and gas activities include contracts to acquire property, plant and equipment and commitments for oil and gas exploration such as costs related to contractually obligated exploratory work programs that are expensed immediately. (d) Service and materials contracts include contracts to purchase services such as utilities, supplies and various other maintenance and operating services. (e) Includes any drilling rigs and fracturing crews that are not considered lease obligations. (f) Primarily includes obligations for pension and other postretirement benefits including medical and life insurance. We have estimated projected funding requirements through 2027. Although unrecognized tax benefits are not a contractual obligation, they are presented in this table because they represent potential demands on our liquidity. (g) This table does not include the estimated discounted liability for dismantlement, abandonment and restoration costs of oil and gas properties of $254 million . See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements. Transactions with Related Parties We own a 63% working interest in the Alba field offshore E.G. Onshore E.G., we own a 52% interest in an LPG processing plant, a 60% interest in an LNG production facility and a 45% interest in a methanol production plant, each through equity method investees. We sell our natural gas from the Alba field to these equity method investees as the feedstock for their production processes. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements Off-balance sheet arrangements comprise those arrangements that may potentially impact our liquidity, capital resources and results of operations, even though such arrangements are not recorded as liabilities under accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Although off-balance sheet arrangements serve a variety of our business purposes, we are not dependent on these arrangements to maintain our liquidity and capital resources, and we are not aware of any circumstances that are reasonably likely to cause the off-balance sheet arrangements to have a material adverse effect on liquidity and capital resources. We will issue stand-alone letters of credit when required by a business partner. Such letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2019 , 2018 and 2017 aggregated $14 million , $52 million and $89 million . Most of the letters of credit are in support of obligations recorded in the consolidated balance sheet. In 2019, our letters of credit outstanding decreased as a result of our upgraded credit rating and the sale of our U.K. business (we no longer have requirements to support firm transportation agreements and future abandonment liabilities). In 2018, we signed an agreement with an owner/lessor to construct and lease a new build-to-suit office building in Houston, Texas. The new Houston office location is expected to be completed in 2021. The lessor and other participants are providing financing for up to $380 million , to fund the estimated project costs. As of December 31, 2019 project costs incurred totaled $58 million , primarily for land acquisition and initial design costs. The initial lease term is five years and will commence once construction is substantially complete and the new Houston office is ready for occupancy. At the end of the initial lease term, we can extend the term of the lease for an additional five years , subject to the approval of the 39 participants; purchase the property subject to certain terms and conditions; or remarket the property to an unrelated third party. The lease contains a residual value guarantee of approximately 89% of the total acquisition and construction costs. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on leases. Management Discussion and Analysis of Environmental Matters, Litigation and Contingencies We have incurred and will continue to incur capital, operating and maintenance, and remediation expenditures as a result of environmental laws and regulations. If these expenditures, as with all costs, are not ultimately offset by the prices of our products and services, our operating results will be adversely affected. We believe that substantially all of our competitors must comply with similar environmental laws and regulations. However, the specific impact on each competitor may vary depending on a number of factors, including the age and location of its operating facilities, marketing areas and production processes. These laws generally provide for control of pollutants released into the environment and require responsible parties to undertake remediation of hazardous waste disposal sites. Penalties may be imposed for noncompliance. We accrue for environmental remediation activities when the responsibility to remediate is probable and the amount of associated costs can be reasonably estimated. As environmental remediation matters proceed toward ultimate resolution or as additional remediation obligations arise, charges in excess of those previously accrued may be required. New or expanded environmental requirements, which could increase our environmental costs, may arise in the future on both state and federal levels. We strive to comply with all legal requirements regarding the environment, but as not all costs are fixed or presently determinable (even under existing legislation) and may be affected by future legislation or regulations, it is not possible to predict all of the ultimate costs of compliance, including remediation costs that may be incurred and penalties that may be imposed. For more information on environmental regulations that impact us, or could impact us, see Item 1. Business Environmental, Health and Safety Matters , Item 1A. Risk Factors and Item 3. Legal Proceedings . Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the respective reporting periods. Accounting estimates are considered to be critical if (1) the nature of the estimates and assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and (2) the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. Actual results could differ from the estimates and assumptions used. Estimated Quantities of Net Reserves We use the successful efforts method of accounting for our oil and gas producing activities. The successful efforts method inherently relies on the estimation of proved crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas reserves. The amount of estimated proved reserve volumes affect, among other things, whether certain costs are capitalized or expensed, the amount and timing of costs depreciated, depleted or amortized into net income and the presentation of supplemental information on oil and gas producing activities. In addition, the expected future cash flows to be generated by producing properties are used for testing impairment and the expected future taxable income available to realize deferred tax assets, also in part, rely on estimates of quantities of net reserves. Refer to the applicable sections below for further discussion of these accounting estimates. The estimation of quantities of net reserves is a highly technical process performed by our petroleum engineers and geoscientists for crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, which is based upon several underlying assumptions. The reserve estimates may change as additional information becomes available and as contractual, operational, economic and political conditions change. We evaluate our reserves using drilling results, reservoir performance, seismic interpretation and future plans to develop acreage. Technologies used in proved reserves estimation includes statistical analysis of production performance, decline curve analysis, pressure and rate transient analysis, pressure gradient analysis, reservoir simulation and volumetric analysis. The observed statistical nature of production performance coupled with highly certain reservoir continuity or quality within the reliable technology areas and sufficient proved developed locations establish the reasonable certainty criteria required for booking proved reserves. The data for a given reservoir may also change over time as a result of numerous factors including, but not limited to, additional development activity and future development costs, production history and continual reassessment of the viability of future production volumes under varying economic conditions. 40 Reserve estimates are based on an unweighted arithmetic average of commodity prices during the 12-month period, using the closing prices on the first day of each month, as defined by the SEC. The table below provides the 2019 SEC pricing for certain benchmark prices: 2019 SEC Pricing WTI Crude oil (per bbl) $ 55.69 Henry Hub natural gas (per mmbtu) $ 2.58 Brent crude oil (per bbl) $ 63.15 Mont Belvieu NGLs (per bbl) $ 18.41 When determining the December 31, 2019 proved reserves for each property, the benchmark prices listed above were adjusted using price differentials that account for property-specific quality and location differences. If crude oil prices in the future average below prices used to determine proved reserves at December 31, 2019 , it could have an adverse effect on our estimates of proved reserve volumes and the value of our business. Future reserve revisions could also result from changes in capital funding, drilling plans and governmental regulation, among other things. It is difficult to estimate the magnitude of any potential price change and the effect on proved reserves, due to numerous factors (including future crude oil price and performance revisions). For further discussion of risks associated with our estimation of proved reserves, see Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors . Depreciation and depletion of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas producing properties is determined by the units-of-production method and could change with revisions to estimated proved reserves. While revisions of previous reserve estimates have not historically been significant to the depreciation and depletion rates of our segments, any reduction in proved reserves, could result in an acceleration of future DD&A expense. The following table illustrates, on average, the sensitivity of each segment units-of-production DD&A per boe and pretax income to a hypothetical 10% change in 2019 proved reserves based on 2019 production. Impact of a 10% Increase in Proved Reserves Impact of a 10% Decrease in Proved Reserves (In millions, except per boe) DD&A per boe Pretax Income DD&A per boe Pretax Income United States $ (1.73 ) $ 205 $ 2.12 $ (250 ) International $ (0.33 ) $ 11 $ 0.40 $ (13 ) Fair Value Estimates Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. There are three approaches for measuring the fair value of assets and liabilities: the market approach, the income approach and the cost approach, each of which includes multiple valuation techniques. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities. The income approach uses valuation techniques to measure fair value by converting future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, into a single present value, or range of present values, using current market expectations about those future amounts. The cost approach is based on the amount that would currently be required to replace the service capacity of an asset. This is often referred to as current replacement cost. The cost approach assumes that the fair value would not exceed what it would cost a market participant to acquire or construct a substitute asset of comparable utility, adjusted for obsolescence. The fair value accounting standards do not prescribe which valuation technique should be used when measuring fair value and do not prioritize among the techniques. These standards establish a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used in applying the various valuation techniques. Inputs broadly refer to the assumptions that market participants use to make pricing decisions, including assumptions about risk. Level 1 inputs are given the highest priority in the fair value hierarchy while Level 3 inputs are given the lowest priority. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows: Level 1 Observable inputs that reflect unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets as of the measurement date. Active markets are those in which transactions for the asset or liability occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis. Level 2 Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data. These are inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the measurement date. Level 3 Unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data and may be used with internally developed methodologies that result in management best estimate of fair value. 41 Valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs are favored. Assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest priority level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment and may affect the placement of assets and liabilities within the levels of the fair value hierarchy. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for disclosures regarding our fair value measurements. Significant uses of fair value measurements include: assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination; assets acquired in an asset acquisition; impairment assessments of long-lived assets; impairment assessments of goodwill; recorded value of derivative instruments; and recorded value of pension plan assets. The need to test long-lived assets and goodwill for impairment can be based on several indicators, including a significant reduction in prices of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, sustained declines in our common stock, reductions to our Capital Budget, unfavorable adjustments to reserves, significant changes in the expected timing of production, other changes to contracts or changes in the regulatory environment in which the property is located. Impairment Assessments of Long-Lived Assets Long-lived assets in use are assessed for impairment whenever changes in facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. For purposes of an impairment evaluation, long-lived assets must be grouped at the lowest level for which independent cash flows can be identified, which generally is field-by-field or, in certain instances, by logical grouping of assets if there is significant shared infrastructure or contractual terms that cause economic interdependency amongst separate, discrete fields. If the sum of the undiscounted estimated cash flows from the use of the asset group and its eventual disposition is less than the carrying value of an asset group, the carrying value is written down to the estimated fair value. During 2019 , proved property impairments were primarily as a result of anticipated sales for certain non-core proved properties in our United States segment and the sale of our non-operated interest in the Atrush block (Kurdistan) in our International segment. We estimated the fair values using a market approach, based upon anticipated sales proceeds less costs to sell, and recognized impairments. Fair value calculated for the purpose of testing our long-lived assets for impairment is estimated using the present value of expected future cash flows method and comparative market prices when appropriate. Significant judgment is involved in performing these fair value estimates since the results are based on forecasted assumptions. Significant assumptions include: Future crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices. Our estimates of future prices are based on our analysis of market supply and demand and consideration of market price indicators. Although these commodity prices may experience extreme volatility in any given year, we believe long-term industry prices are driven by global market supply and demand. To estimate supply, we consider numerous factors, including the worldwide resource base, depletion rates and OPEC production policies. We believe demand is largely driven by global economic factors, such as population and income growth, governmental policies and vehicle stocks. The prices we use in our fair value estimates are consistent with those used in our planning and capital investment reviews. There has been significant volatility in crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices and estimates of such future prices are inherently imprecise. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion on commodity prices. Estimated quantities of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas. Such quantities are based on a combination of proved reserves and risk-weighted probable reserves and resources such that the combined volumes represent the most likely expectation of recovery. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion on reserves. Expected timing of production. Production forecasts are the outcome of engineering studies which estimate reserves, as well as expected capital programs. The actual timing of the production could be different than the projection. Cash flows realized later in the projection period are less valuable than those realized earlier due to the time value of money. The expected timing of production that we use in our fair value estimates is consistent with that used in our planning and capital investment reviews. Discount rate commensurate with the risks involved. We apply a discount rate to our expected cash flows based on a variety of factors, including market and economic conditions, operational risk, regulatory risk and political risk. A higher discount rate decreases the net present value of cash flows. Future capital requirements. Our estimates of future capital requirements are based upon a combination of authorized spending and internal forecasts. 42 We base our fair value estimates on projected financial information which we believe to be reasonably likely to occur. An estimate of the sensitivity to changes in assumptions in our undiscounted cash flow calculations is not practicable, given the numerous assumptions (e.g. reserves, pace and timing of development plans, commodity prices, capital expenditures, operating costs, drilling and development costs, inflation and discount rates) that can materially affect our estimates. Unfavorable adjustments to some of the above listed assumptions would likely be offset by favorable adjustments in other assumptions. For example, the impact of sustained reduced commodity prices on future undiscounted cash flows would likely be partially offset by lower costs. As of December 31, 2019 our estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to our remaining long-lived assets significantly exceeded their carrying values. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 11 and Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of impairments recorded in 2019 , 2018 and 2017 and the related fair value measurements. Impairment Assessments of Goodwill Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis, or between annual tests when events or changes in circumstances indicate the fair value may have been reduced below its carrying value. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. Our reporting units are the same as our reporting segments, of which only International includes goodwill. As of December 31, 2019 , our consolidated balance sheet included goodwill of $ 95 million . Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires judgment and the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Our policy is to first assess the qualitative factors in order to determine whether the fair value of our International reporting unit is more likely than not less than its carrying amount. Certain qualitative factors used in our evaluation include, among other things, the results of the most recent quantitative assessment of the goodwill impairment test; macroeconomic conditions; industry and market conditions (including commodity prices and cost factors); overall financial performance; and other relevant entity-specific events. If, after considering these events and circumstances we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the International reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative goodwill test is performed. The quantitative goodwill test is performed using a combination of market and income approaches. The market approach references observable inputs specific to us and our industry, such as the price of our common equity, our enterprise value, and valuation multiples of us and our peers from the investor analyst community. The income approach utilizes discounted cash flows, which are based on forecasted assumptions. Key assumptions to the income approach are the same as those described above regarding our impairment assessment of long lived assets and are consistent with those that management uses to make business decisions. During the second quarter of 2019 , we performed our annual impairment test of goodwill using the qualitative assessment. Our qualitative assessment considered the significant excess fair value over carrying value in our most recent step 1 test (second quarter of 2017) and noted a general improvement in the qualitative factors above. After assessing the totality of the qualitative factors which could have a positive or negative impact on goodwill, our assessment did not indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying value. As a result, we concluded that no impairment to goodwill was required for our International reporting unit. We believe the estimates and assumptions used in our impairment assessments are reasonable and based on available market information, but variations in such assumptions could result in materially different calculations of fair value and determinations of whether or not an impairment is indicated. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for additional discussion of goodwill. Derivatives We record all derivative instruments at fair value. Fair value measurements for all our derivative instruments are based on observable market-based inputs that are corroborated by market data and are discussed in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements. Additional information about derivatives and their valuation may be found in Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk . Pension Plan Assets Pension plan assets are measured at fair value. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the fair value of plan assets and the presentation of the fair value of our defined benefit pension plan assets by level within the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 . Income Taxes We are subject to income taxes in numerous taxing jurisdictions worldwide. Estimates of income taxes to be recorded involve interpretation of complex tax laws and assessment of the effects of foreign taxes on our U.S. federal income taxes. Uncertainty exists regarding tax positions taken in previously filed tax returns which remain subject to examination, along with positions expected to be taken in future returns. We provide for unrecognized tax benefits, based on the technical merits, when it is more likely than not that an uncertain tax position will not be sustained upon examination. Adjustments are made to 43 the uncertain tax positions when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit; court proceedings; changes in applicable tax laws, including tax case rulings and legislative guidance; or expiration of the applicable statute of limitations. We have recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities, measured at enacted tax rates, for temporary differences between book basis and tax basis, tax credit carryforwards and operating loss carryforwards. In accordance with U.S. GAAP accounting standards, we routinely assess the realizability of our deferred tax assets and reduce such assets, to the expected realizable amount, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In assessing the need for additional or adjustments to existing valuation allowances, we consider all available positive and negative evidence. Positive evidence includes reversals of temporary differences, forecasts of future taxable income, assessment of future business assumptions and applicable tax planning strategies that are prudent and feasible. Negative evidence includes losses in recent years as well as the forecasts of future income (loss) in the realizable period. In making our assessment regarding valuation allowances, we weight the evidence based on objectivity. We base our future taxable income estimates on projected financial information which we believe to be reasonably likely to occur. Numerous judgments and assumptions are inherent in the estimation of future taxable income, including factors such as future operating conditions and the assessment of the effects of foreign taxes on our U.S. federal income taxes. Future operating conditions can be affected by numerous factors, including (i) future crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas prices, (ii) estimated quantities of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas, (iii) expected timing of production, and (iv) future capital requirements. These assumptions are described in further detail above regarding our impairment assessment of long-lived assets. An estimate of the sensitivity to changes in assumptions resulting in future taxable income calculations is not practicable, given the numerous assumptions that can materially affect our estimates. Unfavorable adjustments to some of the above listed assumptions would likely be offset by favorable adjustments in other assumptions. For example, the impact of sustained reduced commodity prices on future taxable income would likely be partially offset by lower capital expenditures. Based on the assumptions and judgments described above, as of December 31, 2019 , we reflect a valuation allowance in our consolidated balance sheet of $699 million against our gross deferred tax assets of $ 2.4 billion in various jurisdictions in which we operate. Our gross deferred tax assets consist primarily of federal U.S. operating loss carryforwards of $655 million , which will expire in 2035 - 2037 , and $829 million which can be carried forward indefinitely. Since December 31, 2016, we have maintained a full valuation allowance on our net federal deferred tax assets. If objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses are no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as forecasted projections of taxable income in future years, we would adjust the amount of the federal deferred tax assets considered realizable and reduce the provision for income taxes in the period of adjustment. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations Accounting for pension and other postretirement benefit obligations involves numerous assumptions, the most significant of which relate to the following: the discount rate for measuring the present value of future plan obligations; the expected long-term return on plan assets; the rate of future increases in compensation levels; and We develop our demographics and utilize the work of third-party actuaries to assist in the measurement of these obligations. We have selected different discount rates for our U.S. pension plans and our other U.S. postretirement benefit plans due to the different projected benefit payment patterns. In determining the assumed discount rates, our methods include a review of market yields on high-quality corporate debt and use of our third-party actuary discount rate model. This model calculates an equivalent single discount rate for the projected benefit plan cash flows using a yield curve derived from bond yields. The yield curve represents a series of annualized individual spot discount rates from 0.5 to 99 years. The bonds used are rated AA or higher by a recognized rating agency, only non-callable bonds are included and outlier bonds (bonds that have a yield to maturity that significantly deviates from the average yield within each maturity grouping) are removed. Each issue is required to have at least $300 million par value outstanding. The constructed yield curve is based on those bonds representing the 50% highest yielding issuances within each defined maturity group. The asset rate of return assumption for the funded U.S. plan considers the plan asset mix (currently targeted at approximately 55% equity and 45% other fixed income securities), past performance and other factors. Certain components of the asset mix are modeled with various assumptions regarding inflation, debt returns and stock yields. Compensation change assumptions are based on historical experience, anticipated future management actions and demographics of the benefit plans. Health care cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. 44 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements includes detailed information about the assumptions used to calculate the components of our annual defined benefit pension and other postretirement plan expense, as well as the obligations and accumulated other comprehensive income reported on the consolidated balance sheets. Contingent Liabilities We accrue contingent liabilities for environmental remediation, tax deficiencies related to operating taxes, as well as tax disputes and litigation claims when such contingencies are probable and estimable. Actual costs can differ from estimates for many reasons. For instance, settlement costs for claims and litigation can vary from estimates based on differing interpretations of laws, opinions on responsibility and assessments of the amount of damages. Similarly, liabilities for environmental remediation may vary from estimates because of changes in laws, regulations and their interpretation, additional information on the extent and nature of site contamination and improvements in technology. Our in-house legal counsel regularly assesses these contingent liabilities. In certain circumstances outside legal counsel is utilized. We generally record losses related to these types of contingencies as other operating expense or general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of income, except for tax contingencies unrelated to income taxes, which are recorded as taxes other than income. For additional information on contingent liabilities, see Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Management Discussion and Analysis of Environmental Matters, Litigation and Contingencies . An estimate of the sensitivity to net income if other assumptions had been used in recording these liabilities is not practical because of the number of contingencies that must be assessed, the number of underlying assumptions and the wide range of reasonably possible outcomes, in terms of both the probability of loss and the estimates of such loss. Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. 45 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility of crude oil and condensate, NGLs, and natural gas prices as the volatility of these prices continues to impact our industry. We expect commodity prices to remain volatile and unpredictable in the future. We are also exposed to market risks related to changes in interest rates. We employ various strategies, including the use of financial derivative instruments, to manage the risks related to these fluctuations. We are at risk for changes in the fair value of all of our derivative instruments; however, such risk should be mitigated by price or rate changes related to the underlying commodity or financial transaction. While the use of derivative instruments could materially affect our results of operations in particular quarterly or annual periods, we believe that the use of these instruments will not have a material adverse effect on our financial position or liquidity. See Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 15 and Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for more information about the fair value measurement of our derivatives, the amounts recorded in our consolidated balance sheets and statements of income and the related notional amounts. Commodity Price Risk Our strategy is to obtain competitive prices for our products and allow operating results to reflect market price movements dictated by supply and demand. However, management will periodically protect prices on forecasted sales to support cash flow and liquidity, as deemed appropriate. We may use a variety of commodity derivative instruments, including futures, forwards, swaps and combinations of options, as part of an overall program to manage commodity price risk in our business. Our consolidated results for 2019 , 2018 and 2017 were impacted by crude oil and natural gas derivatives related to a portion of our forecasted United States sales. As of December 31, 2019 , we had various open commodity derivatives related to crude oil and natural gas with a net asset position of $4 million . Based on the December 31, 2019 , published NYMEX WTI and Henry Hub futures prices, a hypothetical 10% increase or decrease (per bbl for crude oil and per MMBtu for natural gas) would change the fair values of our net commodity derivative open positions to the following: (In millions) Hypothetical Price Increase of 10% Hypothetical Price Decrease of 10% Crude oil derivatives $ (65 ) $ 50 Natural gas derivatives (1 ) Total $ (66 ) $ 50 Interest Rate Risk At December 31, 2019 , our portfolio of long-term debt is comprised of fixed-rate instruments with an outstanding balance of $ 5.5 billion . Our sensitivity to interest rate movements and corresponding changes in the fair value of our fixed-rate debt portfolio affects our results of operations and cash flows only when we elect to repurchase or otherwise retire fixed-rate debt at prices different than carrying value. We also manage our exposure to interest rate movements by utilizing interest rate swap agreements to hedge variations in cash flows related to the 1-month LIBOR component of future lease payments on our future Houston office. At December 31, 2019 , we had forward starting interest rate swap agreements with a total notional of $320 million designated as cash flow hedges. The incremental change on the fair value of a hypothetical 10% increase in interest rates by $3 million , resulting in a fair value of $5 million . The incremental change on the fair value of a hypothetical 10% decrease in interest rates on these interest rate swaps by $2 million , resulting in a fair value of less than $1 million. Counterparty Risk We are also exposed to financial risk in the event of nonperformance by counterparties. If commodity prices fall below current levels, some of our counterparties may experience liquidity problems and may not be able to meet their financial obligations to us. We review the creditworthiness of counterparties and use master netting agreements when appropriate. 46 
