CIK: 927628
Company Name: CAPITAL ONE FINANCIAL CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2013-02-28
Accession Number: 0001193125-13-084249


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based upon management current expectations and are subject to significant uncertainties and changes in circumstances. Please review Forward-Looking Statements for more information on the forward-looking statements in this Report. Our actual results may differ materially from those included in these forward-looking statements due to a variety of factors including, but not limited to, those described in this Report in Item 1A. Risk Factors. Unless otherwise specified, references to Notes to our consolidated financial statements are to the Notes to our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2012 included in this 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K ( 2012 Form 10-K). Management monitors a variety of key indicators to evaluate our business results and financial condition. The following MD&A is intended to provide the reader with an understanding of our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity by focusing on changes from year to year in certain key measures used by management to evaluate performance, such as profitability, growth and credit quality metrics. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2012 and accompanying notes. MD&A is organized in the following sections: Overview Executive Summary and Business Outlook Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Accounting Changes and Developments Consolidated Results of Operations Business Segment Financial Performance Consolidated Balance Sheet Analysis Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Variable Interest Entities Capital Management Risk Management Credit Risk Profile Liquidity Risk Profile Market Risk Profile Supplemental Tables OVERVIEW We are a diversified financial services holding company with banking and non-banking subsidiaries that offer a broad array of financial products and services to consumers, small businesses and commercial clients through branches, the internet and other distribution channels. Our principal subsidiaries included Capital One Bank (USA), National Association ( COBNA ) and Capital One, National Association ( CONA ) as of December 31, 2012. On November 1, 2012, we merged ING Bank, fsb into CONA, with CONA surviving the merger. The Company and its subsidiaries are hereafter collectively referred to as we, us or our. CONA and COBNA are hereafter collectively referred to as the Banks. Period-end loans held for investment increased to $205.9 billion and deposits increased to $212.5 billion as of December 31, 2012, from period-end loans of $135.9 billion and deposits of $128.2 billion as of December 31, 2011. The closing of the ING Direct acquisition on February 17, 2012 resulted in the addition of loans of $40.4 billion and other assets of $53.9 billion at acquisition. The ING Direct acquisition, which added over seven million customers and approximately $84.4 billion in deposits to our Consumer Banking business segment as of the acquisition date, strengthens our customer franchise. With the ING Direct acquisition, we have grown to become the sixth largest depository institution and the largest direct banking institution in the United States. The closing of the 2012 U.S. card acquisition on May 1, 2012 added approximately 27 million new active accounts and approximately $27.8 billion in outstanding credit card receivables as of the acquisition date that we designated as held for investment. Our consolidated total net revenues are derived primarily from lending to consumer and commercial customers and by deposit-taking activities net of the costs associated with funding our assets, which generate net interest income, and by activities that generate non-interest income, such as fee-based services provided to customers and 42 Table of Contents merchant interchange fees with respect to certain credit card transactions. Our expenses primarily consist of the provision for credit losses, operating expenses (including associate salaries and benefits, occupancy and equipment costs, professional services, infrastructure enhancements and branch operations and expansion costs), marketing expenses and income taxes. Our principal operations are currently organized for management reporting purposes into three primary business segments, which are defined primarily based on the products and services provided or the type of customer served: Credit Card, Consumer Banking and Commercial Banking. The operations of acquired businesses have been integrated into our existing business segments. The acquired ING Direct business is primarily reflected in our Consumer Banking business, while the business acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition is reflected in our Credit Card business. Certain activities that are not part of a segment are included in our Other category. Credit Card : Consists of our domestic consumer and small business card lending, national small business lending, national closed end installment lending and the international card lending businesses in Canada and the United Kingdom. Consumer Banking : Consists of our branch-based lending and deposit gathering activities for consumers and small businesses, national deposit gathering, national auto lending and consumer home loan lending and servicing activities. Commercial Banking : Consists of our lending, deposit gathering and treasury management services to commercial real estate and commercial and industrial customers. Our commercial and industrial customers typically include companies with annual revenues between $10 million to $1.0 billion. In the first quarter of 2012, we re-aligned the loan categories reported by our Commercial Banking business and the loan customer and product types included within each category. Prior period amounts have been recast to conform to the current period presentation. Table 1 summarizes our business segment results, which we report based on income from continuing operations, net of tax, for 2012, 2011 and 2010. We provide additional information on the realignment of our Commercial Banking business segment below under Business Segment Results and in Note 20 Business Segments of this Report. We also provide additional information on the allocation methodologies used to derive our business segment results and a reconciliation of our total business segment results to our consolidated U.S. GAAP results in Note 20 Business Segments. Table 1: Business Segment Results Year Ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Total Net Revenue (1) Net Income (Loss) (2) Total Net Revenue (1) Net Income (Loss) (2) Total Net Revenue (1) Net Income (Loss) (2) (Dollars in millions) Amount % of Total Amount % of Total Amount % of Total Amount % of Total Amount % of Total Amount % of Total Credit Card $ 13,260 62 % $ 1,530 41 % $ 10,431 64 % $ 2,277 70 % $ 10,614 66 % $ 2,274 75 % Consumer Banking 6,570 30 1,363 37 4,956 30 809 25 4,597 28 905 30 Commercial Banking 2,080 10 835 22 1,879 12 595 18 1,635 10 204 6 Other (3) (514 ) (2 ) 6 (987 ) (6 ) (428 ) (13 ) (669 ) (4 ) (333 ) (11 ) Total from continuing operations $ 21,396 100 % $ 3,734 100 % $ 16,279 100 % $ 3,253 100 % $ 16,177 100 % $ 3,050 100 % (1) Total net revenue consists of net interest income and non-interest income. (2) Net income (loss) for our business segments is reported based on income from continuing operations, net of tax. (3) Includes the residual impact of the allocation of our centralized Corporate Treasury group activities, such as management of our corporate investment portfolio and asset/liability management, to our business segments as well as other items as described in Note 20 Business Segments. 43 Table of Contents EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND BUSINESS OUTLOOK In 2012, we completed two major acquisitions ING Direct and the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. Certain purchase accounting adjustments and other charges related to these acquisitions had a significant impact on our earnings in 2012 and resulted in volatility among quarterly results. The impact of the acquisition-related adjustments, however, had diminished considerably by the end of the year. Our 2012 results reflected strong contributions from the acquired businesses, as well as solid performance in our legacy businesses, despite the industry-wide challenges of an uncertain and fragile economy, prolonged low interest rates and elevated regulatory expectations facing all banks. Purchase volumes, revenues and credit performance remained strong in 2012, and our earnings, together with capital raised from equity issuances during the year, further bolstered our liquidity and regulatory capital position. We continue to devote significant effort to integrating the operations of these acquired businesses and investing in franchise enhancements. The combination of the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions has shifted the mix of our interest-earning assets and driven substantial growth in our total net revenues, putting us in what we believe is a strong position to generate capital and deliver sustained shareholder value, even in the current environment of low industry growth and prolonged low interest rates. Financial Highlights We reported net income of $3.5 billion ($6.16 per diluted share) on total net revenue of $21.4 billion in 2012, with each of our three business segments contributing to our earnings. In comparison, we reported net income of $3.1 billion ($6.80 per diluted share) on total net revenue of $16.3 billion in 2011 and net income of $2.7 billion ($6.01 per diluted share) on total net revenue of $16.2 billion in 2010. Our Tier 1 common ratio, as calculated under Basel I, increased to 11.0% as of December 31, 2012, up from 9.7% as of December 31, 2011. The increase in our Tier 1 common ratio reflected strong internal capital generation from earnings, as well as capital raised from equity issuances during the year. Based on our current interpretation of the proposed rules for implementing Basel III, we believe we are well positioned to meet our fully phased-in assumed Tier 1 common ratio target under Basel III of approximately 8.0% in early 2013. Our Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio, as calculated under Basel I, was 11.3% as of December 31, 2012, down from 12.0% as of December 31, 2011. The decrease was primarily driven by the significant increase in risk-weighted assets resulting from the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions, which more than offset the benefit of an increase in Tier 1 capital. See Capital Management below for additional information. Below are additional highlights of our performance in 2012. These highlights generally are based on a comparison between our 2012 and 2011 results, except as otherwise noted. The changes in our financial condition and credit performance are generally based on our financial condition and credit performance as of December 31, 2012, compared with our financial condition and credit performance as of December 31, 2011. We provide a more detailed discussion of our financial performance in the sections following this Executive Summary and Business Outlook. Total Company Earnings: Our net income of $3.5 billion in 2012 increased by $370 million, or 12%, from 2011. The increase in net income reflected the favorable impact of higher total net revenue from our legacy businesses, increased revenues from acquired businesses and a bargain purchase gain of $594 million recorded at closing of the ING Direct acquisition. The increase in net revenue was largely offset by post-acquisition charges related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, including a provision for credit losses of $1.2 billion to establish an initial allowance for the approximately $26.2 billion in outstanding credit card receivables from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition designated as held for investment that had existing revolving privileges at acquisition and an initial charge of $174 million to establish a reserve for estimated uncollectible billed 44 Table of Contents finance charges and fees for these loans. In addition, non-interest expense grew substantially due to higher operating expenses and merger-related expenses related to our recent acquisitions, as well as higher infrastructure expenses resulting from continued investments in our home and auto loan businesses. Total Loans: Period-end loans held for investment increased by $70.0 billion, or 52%, in 2012 to $205.9 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $135.9 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase was primarily attributable to the addition of the acquired ING Direct loan portfolio of $40.4 billion and the receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition designated as held for investment of $27.8 billion. Excluding the impact of the addition of these loans, period-end loans held for investment increased by $1.8 billion, or 1%. The increase reflected strong commercial loan growth and continued growth in auto loans, which was partially offset by the continued expected run-off of installment loans in our Credit Card business and home loans in our Consumer Banking business. Charge-off and Delinquency Statistics: Our net charge-off rate decreased to 1.89% in 2012, from 2.94% in 2011. The 30+ day delinquency rate also declined during the year to 3.09% as of December 31, 2012, from 3.95% as of December 31, 2011. As discussed above, the accounting and classification of acquired loans accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected may significantly alter some of our reported credit quality metrics. The credit mark established in conjunction with acquired loans from the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions absorbed a significant portion of the uncollectible amounts that we would have recorded as charge-offs on these portfolios in the second and third quarters of 2012, resulting in unusually low net-charge off rates in each of these quarters. By the fourth quarter of 2012, the credit mark impact related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition had diminished, with no meaningful impact on net charge-offs in the quarter. We provide information on our credit quality metrics, excluding the impact of acquired loans accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected, below under Business Segments and Credit Risk Profile. Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses: We increased our allowance by $906 million in 2012 to $5.2 billion as of December 31, 2012. In comparison, we reduced our allowance by $1.4 billion in 2011. The increase in the allowance in 2012 was primarily attributable to the initial allowance build of $1.2 billion in the second quarter of 2012 that we established for the approximately $26.2 billion in outstanding credit card receivables from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition that had existing revolving privileges at acquisition, as well as growth in auto loan balances. Excluding the initial allowance build of $1.2 billion established for the receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, we recorded an allowance release of $294 million in 2012 primarily attributable to a significant improvement in underlying credit performance trends in our Commercial Banking business. Although the allowance increased in 2012, the coverage ratio of the allowance to total loans held for investment fell to 2.50% as of December 31, 2012, from 3.13% as of December 31, 2011. The decrease in the allowance coverage ratio was largely due to the (i) addition of the receivables acquired in the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected, for which we did not record an allowance in accordance with the required accounting guidance for these loans, and (ii) improved credit performance for our commercial loan portfolio. Representation and Warranty Reserve : We recorded a provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses of $349 million in 2012, compared with a provision of $212 million in 2011. The increase in the provision in 2012 was primarily driven by updated estimates of anticipated outcomes from various litigation and threatened litigation in the insured securitization segment based on relevant factual and legal developments and settlements during the year with a government-sponsored enterprise ( GSE ) to resolve present and future claims. Our representation and warranty reserve decreased to $899 million as of December 31, 2012, from $943 million as of December 31, 2011, largely due to settlements during 2012. As of December 31, 2012, our best estimate of reasonably possible future losses from representation and warranty claims beyond what is in our reserve was approximately $2.7 billion, an increase from our previous estimates of $1.7 billion as of September 30, 2012, and $1.5 billion as of December 31, 2011. We provide additional information on the representation and warranty reserve in Critical Accounting Policies 45 Table of Contents and Estimates Representation and Warranty Reserve and Note 21 Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees. Business Segments Credit Card: Our Credit Card business generated net income from continuing operations of $1.5 billion in 2012, compared with net income from continuing operations of $2.3 billion in 2011. The decrease in earnings in 2012 was largely due to significant post-acquisition charges related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, including a provision for credit losses of $1.2 billion to establish an initial allowance for outstanding credit card receivables from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition with existing revolving privileges at acquisition, PCCR intangible amortization expense of $334 million and higher operating expenses resulting from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. The unfavorable impact of these charges diminished the favorable impact of the substantial increase in total net revenue resulting from the addition of credit card receivables from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. Period-end loans in our Credit Card business increased by $26.7 billion, or 41%, in 2012, to $91.8 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase was primarily due to the addition of the $27.8 billion in outstanding receivables classified as held for investment. Excluding the addition of the acquired receivables, period-end loans held for investment decreased by $1.1 billion, or 2%, due to the expected continued run-off of our installment loan portfolio. Consumer Banking: Our Consumer Banking business generated net income from continuing operations of $1.4 billion in 2012, compared with net income from continuing operations of $809 million in 2011. The increase in earnings was attributable to growth in total net revenue, which was partially offset by higher non-interest expense and an increase in the provision for credit losses. Growth in revenue stemmed from higher average loan balances resulting from increased auto loan originations and added home loans from the ING Direct acquisition, coupled with the significant increase in deposits from the ING Direct acquisition. The increase in non-interest expense was largely due to operating expenses associated with ING Direct, higher infrastructure expenditures related to our home loan business and growth in auto originations and higher marketing expenditures in our retail banking operations. The increase in the provision for credit losses was largely due to higher auto loan balances resulting from growth in auto loan originations. Period-end loans in our Consumer Banking business increased by $38.8 billion, or 107%, in 2012 to $75.1 billion as of December 31, 2012, primarily due to the acquisition of $40.4 billion of ING Direct home loans and growth in auto loan originations. Excluding the addition of the acquired ING Direct loans, period-end loans held for investment decreased by $1.6 billion, or 4%, due to the expected continued run-off of our acquired home loan portfolios. Commercial Banking: Our Commercial Banking business generated net income from continuing operations of $835 million in 2012, compared with net income from continuing operations of $595 million in 2011. The improvement in results for Commercial Banking was attributable to an increase in revenues driven by increased average loan balances as well as a decrease in the provision for credit losses due to improving credit trends. These factors were partially offset by higher non-interest expense resulting from operating costs associated with the increased volume of loan originations in our commercial real estate and commercial and industrial businesses, increased infrastructure expenditures and the expansion into new markets. Period-end loans increased by $4.5 billion, or 13%, in 2012 to $38.8 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase was driven by stronger loan originations in the commercial and industrial and commercial real estate businesses, which was partially offset by the run-off and sale of a portion of the small-ticket commercial real estate loan portfolio. 46 Table of Contents Recent Developments Redemption of Trust Preferred Securities As of December 31, 2012, we had outstanding trust preferred securities with a combined aggregate principal amount of $3.65 billion that previously qualified as Tier 1 capital. On January 2, 2013, we redeemed all of our outstanding trust preferred securities, which generally carried a higher coupon cost, ranging from 3.36% to 10.25%, than other funding sources available to us. Pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Tier 1 capital treatment of trust preferred securities is to be phased out over a three year period starting on January 1, 2013. Subordinated Note Exchange On January 23, 2013, we announced the commencement of an any and all exchange offer for COBNA $1.5 billion of outstanding 8.80% subordinated notes due 2019. The transaction involved offering current holders market value plus an exchange premium for these outstanding notes, which was consideration paid through a combination of new 10-year subordinated bank notes and cash. The exchange offer expired on February 20, 2013. Pursuant to the exchange offer, COBNA exchanged approximately 80% of its outstanding 8.80% subordinated notes due 2019 for new 3.375% subordinated notes due 2023. Credit Card Securitization On February 1, 2013, we executed our first credit card securitization transaction since 2009 by issuing $750 million of 3-year, AAA-rated fixed-rate notes from our credit card securitization trust. Sale of Best Buy Card Portfolio On February 19, 2013, we announced an agreement to sell the portfolio of Best Buy Stores, L.P. ( Best Buy ) private label and co-branded credit card accounts that we acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition to Citibank, N.A. ( Citi ). At the time of the announcement, the portfolio had loan balances of approximately $7 billion. In addition, we and Best Buy have agreed to end our contractual credit card relationship early. The sale of the loans to Citi, which is subject to customary closing conditions, and early termination of the Best Buy partnership are expected to be finalized in the third quarter of 2013. In the first quarter of 2013, the assets subject to the sale agreement were transferred to the held for sale category. Upon closing, we expect that the proceeds from the sale will approximate the book value of the accounts, resulting in no significant gain or loss on the transaction. For additional information, see Note 24 Subsequent Events. Business Outlook We discuss below our current expectations regarding our total company performance and the performance of each of our business segments over the near-term based on market conditions, the regulatory environment and our business strategies as of the time we filed this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The statements contained in this section are based on our current expectations regarding our outlook for our financial results and business strategies. Our expectations take into account, and should be read in conjunction with, our expectations regarding economic trends and analysis of our business as discussed in Item 1. Business and Item 7. MD&A of this Report. Certain statements are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Actual results could differ materially from those in our forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements do not reflect: (i) any change in current dividend or repurchase strategies, (ii) the effect of any acquisitions, divestitures or similar transactions, except for the forward-looking statements specifically discussing the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions, or (iii) any changes in laws, regulations or regulatory interpretations, in each case after the date as of which such statements are made. See Item 1. Business Forward-Looking Statements for more information on the forward-looking statements in this Report and Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Report for factors that could materially influence our results. 47 Table of Contents Total Company Expectations Our strategies and actions are designed to deliver and sustain strong returns and capital generation through the acquisition and retention of franchise-enhancing customer relationships across our businesses. We believe that franchise-enhancing customer relationships create and sustain significant long-term value through low credit costs, long and loyal customer relationships and a gradual build in loan balances and revenues over time. Examples of franchise-enhancing customer relationships include rewards customers and new partnerships in our Credit Card business, retail deposit customers in our Consumer Banking business and primary banking relationships with commercial customers in our Commercial Banking business. We intend to grow these customer relationships by continuing to invest in scalable infrastructure and operating platforms that are appropriate for a bank of our size and business mix so that we can meet the rising regulatory and compliance expectations facing all banks and deliver a brand-defining customer experience that builds and sustains a valuable, long-term customer franchise. The ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions strengthened and expanded our customer base, and, over time, we expect to expand and deepen our customer relationships with new products and services. We expect average interest-earning assets will decline in 2013. We expect average loan balances for full-year 2013 to decline from average loan balances in the fourth quarter of 2012, as significant run-off of mortgage and card loans we acquired, coupled with the sale of the Best Buy loan portfolio, is partially offset by growth in our businesses. We expect run-off and sales of approximately $18 billion in ending loan balances in 2013, primarily comprised of approximately $9 billion in run-off of mortgage loans acquired from ING Direct and Chevy Chase Bank, approximately $7 billion from the sale of the Best Buy loan portfolio and approximately $2 billion in run-off of other credit card loans purchased in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. We expect this decline to be partially offset by growth in certain of our businesses, including parts of Domestic Card, Auto and Commercial Banking. However, we expect continued weak consumer demand across our Credit Card and Auto lending businesses, as well as intensifying competition in several businesses, particularly Auto and Commercial and Industrial lending. We expect net interest margin to be modestly higher in 2013 versus 2012 levels, with steady yield on average earning assets and an expected reduction in interest expense. We expect overall non-interest expense in 2013 to total approximately $12.5 billion, or just over $3.1 billion on average per quarter. We expect total annual non-interest expense, excluding marketing, to be approximately $11 billion dollars in 2013 and marketing expense for 2013 to be approximately $1.5 billion. We believe our actions have created a well-positioned balance sheet with strong capital and liquidity levels, and a strong capital generation trajectory. We expect to exceed an assumed Basel III Tier 1 common ratio internal target of 8 percent in early 2013. Our estimated Basel III capital trajectory includes the estimated impact of implementing the Basel II Advanced Approaches to calculate regulatory capital, which we expect will apply to us in 2016 or later. The assumed 8% Basel III Tier 1 common ratio target assumes a buffer of 50 basis points for a systemically important financial institution ( SIFI ) under applicable rules and regulations and a further buffer of 50 basis points to cover potential volatility in both the numerator and denominator of the Tier 1 common ratio. Our actual operating levels for capital will vary over time depending on our outlook on near-to-medium term growth, our view of where we are in the economic cycle and our resilience under ongoing stress-testing processes. The assumed Basel III Tier 1 common level is estimated based on our current interpretation, expectations and understanding of the Basel III capital rules and other capital regulations proposed by U.S. regulators and the application of such rules to our businesses as currently conducted. Basel III calculations are necessarily subject to change based on, among other things, the scope and terms of the final rules and regulations, model calibration and other implementation guidance, changes in our businesses and certain actions of management, including those affecting the composition of our balance sheet. We believe this ratio provides useful information to investors and others by measuring our progress against expected future regulatory capital standards. 48 Table of Contents Business Segment Expectations Credit Card Business As noted above, in Domestic Card, the closing of the 2012 U.S. card acquisition has impacted and will continue to affect quarterly trends in loan growth, revenue margin and credit metrics. We anticipate that the run-off of parts of the portfolio acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition as well as anticipated run-off of in our installment loan portfolio will more than offset the underlying growth trajectory in other parts of our Domestic Card business resulting in a modest decline in full-year average loan balances in 2013 from average loan balances in the fourth quarter of 2012. In addition, the sale of the Best Buy loan portfolio will result in an incremental reduction in loans held for investment of approximately $7 billion. We expect charge-off levels to remain relatively stable with normal seasonal patterns in 2013. As we have disclosed in the past, we are taking actions that we believe will enhance our franchise, such as aligning customer practices related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition with our own, and ending the sale of products like payment protection, which will have a modest negative impact on revenue margin. We also expect that the run-off of higher-margin, higher-loss receivables purchased in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition will change the mix of loans in our Domestic Card business, driving a further modest reduction of revenue margin in 2013. We expect the sale of the Best Buy portfolio, which resulted in our transferring these loans to held for sale from held for investment in the first quarter of 2013, and the related held-for-sale loan accounting will increase our revenue margins until the sale of the loans. Other factors which we are unable to accurately predict will also affect revenue margin. These factors, which include market and pricing dynamics, credit trends, and competitive intensity, could have positive or negative impacts on the Domestic Card revenue margin. Consumer Banking Business In our Consumer Banking business, we expect the ING Direct acquisition to continue to have a significant impact on Consumer Banking loan volumes as we anticipate that run-off in the acquired Home Loans portfolio will more than offset growth in auto loans. Commercial Banking Business Our Commercial Banking business continues to grow loans, deposits, and revenues as we attract new customers and deepen relationships with existing customers. Although we anticipate some quarterly fluctuations in nonperforming loan and charge-off rates, we expect our Commercial Banking business to continue strong and relatively steady performance trends throughout 2013. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make a number of judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, income and expenses in the consolidated financial statements. Understanding our accounting policies and the extent to which we use management judgment and estimates in applying these policies is integral to understanding our financial statements. We provide a summary of our significant accounting policies in Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. 49 Table of Contents We have identified the following accounting policies as critical because they require significant judgments and assumptions about highly complex and inherently uncertain matters and the use of reasonably different estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on our reported results of operations or financial condition. These critical accounting policies govern: Loan loss reserves Asset impairment Fair value Representation and warranty reserve Customer rewards reserve Income taxes We evaluate our critical accounting estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis and update them, as necessary, based on changing conditions. Management has reviewed and approved these critical accounting policies and has discussed judgments and assumptions with the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board of Directors. Loan Loss Reserves We maintain an allowance for loan and lease losses that represents management estimate of incurred loan and lease losses inherent in our held-for-investment credit card, consumer banking and commercial banking loan portfolios as of each balance sheet date. We maintain a separate reserve for the uncollectible portion of billed finance charges and fees on credit card loans. Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses We have an established process, using analytical tools, benchmarks and management judgment, to determine our allowance for loan and lease losses. We calculate the allowance for loan and lease losses by estimating incurred losses for segments of our loan portfolio with similar risk characteristics and record a provision for credit losses. We build our allowance for loan and lease losses and unfunded lending commitment reserves through the provision for credit losses. Our provision for credit losses in each period is driven by charge-offs and the level of allowance for loan and lease losses that we determine is necessary to provide for probable loan and lease losses incurred that are inherent in our loan portfolio as of each balance sheet date. We recorded a provision for credit losses of $4.4 billion, $2.4 billion and $3.9 billion in 2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively. The allowance totaled $5.2 billion as of December 31, 2012, compared with $4.3 billion as of December 31, 2011. We review and assess our allowance methodologies and adequacy of the allowance for loan and lease losses on a quarterly basis. Our assessment involves evaluating many factors including, but not limited to, historical loss and recovery experience, recent trends in delinquencies and charge-offs, risk ratings, the impact of bankruptcy filings, the value of collateral underlying secured loans, account seasoning, changes in our credit evaluation, underwriting and collection management policies, seasonality, general economic conditions, changes in the legal and regulatory environment and uncertainties in forecasting and modeling techniques used in estimating our allowance for loan and lease losses. Key factors that have a significant impact on our allowance for loan and lease losses include assumptions about unemployment rates, home prices, and the valuation of commercial properties, consumer real estate, and autos. Although we examine a variety of externally available data, as well as our internal loan performance data, to determine our allowance for loan and lease losses, our estimation process is subject to risks and uncertainties, including a reliance on historical loss and trend information that may not be representative of current conditions and indicative of future performance. Accordingly, our actual credit loss experience may not be in line with our expectations. For example, excluding the initial allowance build of $1.2 billion established for certain loans related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, we recorded an allowance release of $294 million in 2012, attributable to a significant improvement in underlying credit performance trends in our Commercial Banking business. Similarly, as a result of improving credit performance trends during 2011, charge-offs began to decrease across all of our business segments, and we recorded a significant allowance release of $1.4 billion in 2011. 50 Table of Contents We provide additional information on the methodologies and key assumptions used in determining our allowance for loan and lease losses for each of our loan portfolio segments in Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. We provide information on the components of our allowance, disaggregated by impairment methodology, and changes in our allowance in Note 6 Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses. Finance Charge and Fee Reserve We recognize finance charges and fees on credit card loans as revenue when the amounts are billed to the customer and include these amounts in the loan balance, net of the estimated uncollectible amount of billed finance charges and fees. We continue to accrue finance charges and fees on credit card loans until the account is charged-off; however, when we do not expect full payment of billed finance charges and fees, we reduce the balance of our credit card loan receivables by the amount of finance charges and fees billed but not expected to be collected and exclude this amount from revenue. Total net revenue was reduced by $937 million, $371 million and $950 million in 2012, 2011, 2010, respectively, for the estimated uncollectible amount of billed finance charges and fees. The finance charge and fee reserve totaled $307 million as of December 31, 2012, compared with $74 million as of December 31, 2011. We review and assess the adequacy of the uncollectible finance charge and fee reserve on a quarterly basis. Our methodology for estimating the uncollectible portion of billed finance charges and fees is primarily based on the use of a roll-rate methodology and consistent with the methodology we use to estimate the allowance for incurred principal losses on our credit card loan receivables. Accordingly, the estimation process is subject to similar risks and uncertainties, including a reliance on historical loss and trend information that may not be representative of current conditions and indicative of future performance. We refine our estimation process and key assumptions used in determining our loss reserves as additional information becomes available. Changes in key assumptions may have a material impact on the amount of billed finance charges and fees we estimate as uncollectible in each period. For example, in the third quarter of 2011, we revised the manner in which we estimate expected recoveries of finance charge and fee amounts previously considered to be uncollectible. Our revised recovery assumptions better reflected the post-recession pattern of relatively low delinquency roll-rates combined with increased recoveries of finance charges and fees previously considered uncollectible. This change in assumptions resulted in a reduction in our uncollectible finance charge and fee reserves of approximately $83 million and a corresponding increase in revenues. We also applied these revised assumptions to the estimated recovery of principal charge-offs in determining our allowance for loan and lease losses. Asset Impairment In addition to our loan portfolio, we review other assets for impairment on a regular basis in accordance with applicable impairment accounting guidance. This process requires significant management judgment and involves various estimates and assumptions. Our investment securities and goodwill and intangible assets represent a significant portion of our other assets. Accordingly, below we describe our process for assessing impairment of these assets and the key estimates and assumptions involved in this process. Investment Securities We regularly review investment securities for other-than-temporary impairment using both quantitative and qualitative criteria. If we intend to sell a security in an unrealized loss position or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security prior to recovery of its amortized cost basis, the entire difference between the amortized cost basis of the security and its fair value is recognized in earnings. If we do not intend to sell the security and it is not more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of our amortized cost, we evaluate other qualitative criteria to determine whether a credit loss exists. Our evaluation requires significant management judgment and a consideration of many factors, including, but not limited to, the extent and duration of the impairment; the health of and specific prospects for the issuer, including whether the issuer has failed to make scheduled interest or principal payments; recent events specific to the issuer and/or 51 Table of Contents industry to which the issuer belongs; the payment structure of the security; external credit ratings; the value of underlying collateral and current market conditions. Quantitative criteria include assessing whether there has been an adverse change in expected future cash flows. See Note 4 Investment Securities for additional information. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets As a result of our acquisitions, including Hibernia Corporation in 2005, North Fork Bancorporation in 2006, Chevy Chase Bank in 2009, and the 2012 U.S. card acquisition we have goodwill and other intangible assets. Goodwill resulting from business combinations prior to January 1, 2009 represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill resulting from business combinations after January 1, 2009, is generally determined as the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred, plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree, over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. Goodwill totaled $13.9 billion and $13.6 billion as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Other intangible assets, which we report on our consolidated balance sheets as a component of other assets, consist primarily of PCCR and core deposit intangibles. The net carrying value of other intangible assets increased to $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $610 million as of December 31, 2011. The increase was primarily due to the PCCR intangible of $2.2 billion recorded in connection with the 2012 U.S. card acquisition on May 1, 2012. Goodwill and other intangible assets together represented 5% and 7% of our total assets as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Goodwill Goodwill is not amortized but must be allocated to reporting units and tested for impairment on an annual basis or in interim periods if events or circumstances indicate potential impairment. A reporting unit is a business segment or one level below. Our reporting units for purposes of goodwill impairment testing are Domestic Card, International Card, Auto Finance, other Consumer Banking and Commercial Banking. We perform our annual goodwill impairment test for all reporting units as of October 1 each year using a two-step process. First, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its current carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit is in excess of the carrying value, the related goodwill is considered not to be impaired and no further analysis is necessary. If, however, the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, there is an indication of potential impairment and a second step of testing is performed to measure the amount of impairment, if any, for that reporting unit. We do not maintain separate balance sheets at the reporting unit level; therefore, we determine the carrying values of our reporting units based on an economic capital approach, in which we calculate each reporting unit capital requirements based on the individual reporting units capital allocation rates applied to their outstanding loans and deposits plus specifically assigned goodwill and intangible assets. The capital allocation rates are approved by our Chief Executive Officer and executive team on an annual basis and are based on our current regulatory requirements and reporting unit specific risks and capital structures. The economic capital approach appropriately reflects the carrying value of each our reporting units based on the capital allocated to and managed at each of those reporting units. We compare the total reporting unit carrying values to our total consolidated stockholders equity, as discussed further in Note 8 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, to assess the appropriateness of our methodology. If the second step of goodwill impairment testing is required for a reporting unit, we undertake an extensive effort to build the specific reporting unit balance sheet for the test based on applicable accounting guidance. Estimating the fair value of reporting units and the assets, liabilities and intangible assets of a reporting unit is a subjective process that involves the use of estimates and judgments, particularly related to cash flows, the appropriate discount rates and an applicable control premium. Management judgment is required to assess 52 Table of Contents whether the carrying value of the reporting unit can be supported by the fair value of the individual reporting unit. There are widely accepted valuation methodologies, such as the market approach (earnings multiples and/or transaction multiples) and/or income approach (discounted cash flow methods), that are used to estimate the fair value of reporting units. In applying these methodologies, we utilize a number of factors, including actual operating results, future business plans, economic projections, and market data. We also may engage an independent valuation specialist to assist in our valuation process. In estimating the fair value of the reporting units in step one of the goodwill impairment analyses, fair values can be sensitive to changes in the projected cash flows and assumptions. In some instances, minor changes in the assumptions could impact whether the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount. Furthermore, a prolonged decrease or increase in a particular assumption could eventually lead to the fair value of a reporting unit being less than its carrying amount. Also, to the extent step two of the goodwill analyses is required, changes in the estimated fair values of individual assets and liabilities may impact other estimates of fair value for assets or liabilities and result in a different amount of implied goodwill, and ultimately the amount of goodwill impairment, if any. In conducting our goodwill impairment test for 2012, we determined the fair value of our reporting units using a discounted cash flow analysis, a form of the income approach. Our discounted cash flow analysis required management to make judgments about future loan and deposit growth, revenue growth, loan and lease losses, and capital rates. We relied on each reporting unit internal cash flow forecast and calculated a terminal value using a growth rate that reflected the nominal growth rate of the economy as a whole and appropriate discount rates for the respective reporting units. We adjusted cash flows as necessary to maintain each reporting unit equity capital requirements. The cash flows were discounted to present value using reporting unit specific discount rates that were largely based on our external cost of equity, adjusted for risks inherent in each reporting unit. We corroborated the key inputs used in our discounted cash flow analysis with market data, where available, to validate that our assumptions were within a reasonable range of observable market data. Based on the results of step one of our 2012 goodwill impairment test, we determined that the fair value of each of our reporting units, including goodwill, significantly exceeded the carrying value for each reporting unit. Fair value as a percentage of carrying value for our five reporting units ranged from 117% to 188%, with the International reporting unit being at the low end of this range. As such, none of our reporting units was at risk of failing step one of the impairment test. Accordingly, the goodwill for each of our reporting units was considered not impaired. Therefore, the second step of impairment testing was not required. As part of the annual goodwill impairment test, we assessed our market capitalization based on the average market price relative to the aggregate fair value of our reporting units and determined that any excess fair value in our reporting units at that time could be attributed to a reasonable control premium compared to historical control premiums seen in the industry. We will continue to regularly monitor our market capitalization in 2013, overall economic conditions and other events or circumstances that may result in an impairment of goodwill in the future. We did not recognize goodwill impairment in either 2011 or 2010. Other Intangible Assets Intangible assets with definitive useful lives are amortized over their estimated lives and evaluated for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that an asset or asset group carrying value may not be fully recoverable. An impairment loss, generally calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying value. We did not recognize impairment on other intangible assets in 2012, 2011 or 2010. 53 Table of Contents We provide additional information on the nature of and accounting for goodwill and other intangible assets, including the process and methodology used to conduct goodwill impairment testing, in Note 8 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. Fair Value Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date (also referred to as an exit price). The fair value accounting guidance provides a three-level fair value hierarchy for classifying financial instruments. This hierarchy is based on whether the inputs to the valuation techniques used to measure fair value are observable or unobservable. Fair value measurement of a financial asset or liability is assigned to a level based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are described below: Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2: Observable market-based inputs, other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 3: Unobservable inputs The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted prices in active markets or observable market parameters. When quoted prices and observable data in active markets are not fully available, management judgment is necessary to estimate fair value. Changes in market conditions, such as reduced liquidity in the capital markets or changes in secondary market activities, may reduce the availability and reliability of quoted prices or observable data used to determine fair value. We have developed policies and procedures to determine when markets for our financial assets and liabilities are inactive if the level and volume of activity has declined significantly relative to normal conditions. If markets are determined to be inactive, it may be appropriate to adjust price quotes received. When significant adjustments are required to price quotes or inputs, it may be appropriate to utilize an estimate based primarily on unobservable inputs. Significant judgment may be required to determine whether certain financial instruments measured at fair value are included in Level 2 or Level 3. In making this determination, we consider all available information that market participants use to measure the fair value of the financial instrument, including observable market data, indications of market liquidity and orderliness, and our understanding of the valuation techniques and significant inputs used. Based upon the specific facts and circumstances of each instrument or instrument category, judgments are made regarding the significance of the Level 3 inputs to the instruments fair value measurement in its entirety. If Level 3 inputs are considered significant, the instrument is classified as Level 3. The process for determining fair value using unobservable inputs is generally more subjective and involves a high degree of management judgment and assumptions. Our financial instruments recorded at fair value on a recurring basis represented approximately 21% of our total reported assets of $312.9 billion as of December 31, 2012, compared with 20% of our total reported assets of $206.0 billion as of December 31, 2011. Financial assets for which the fair value was determined using significant Level 3 inputs represented approximately 5% and 2% of these financial instruments (less than 1% of total assets) as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. We discuss changes in the valuation inputs and assumptions used in determining the fair value of our financial instruments, including the extent to which we have relied on significant unobservable inputs to estimate fair value and our process for corroborating these inputs, in Note 19 Fair Value of Financial Instruments. 54 Table of Contents Key Controls Over Fair Value Measurement We have a governance framework and a number of key controls that are intended to ensure that our fair value measurements are appropriate and reliable. Our governance framework provides for independent oversight and segregation of duties. Our control processes include review and approval of new transaction types, price verification and review of valuation judgments, methods, models, process controls and results. Groups independent from our trading and investing functions, including our Valuations Group, Model Validation Group and Fair Value Committee ( FVC ), participate in the review and validation process. The fair valuation governance process is set up in a manner that allows the Chairperson of the FVC to escalate valuation disputes that cannot be resolved at the FVC to a more senior committee called the Valuations Advisory Committee ( VAC ) for resolution. The VAC is chaired by the Chief Financial Officer. Membership of the VAC includes the Chief Risk Officer. Our Valuations Group performs periodic independent verification of fair value measurements by using independent analytics and other available market data to determine if assigned fair values are reasonable. For example, in cases where we rely on third party pricing services to obtain fair value measures, we analyze pricing variances among different pricing sources and validate the final price used by comparing the information to additional sources, including dealer pricing indications in transaction results and other internal sources, where necessary. Additional validation procedures performed by the Valuations Group include reviewing (either directly or indirectly through the reasonableness of assigned fair values) valuation inputs and assumptions, and monitoring acceptable variances between recommended prices and validation prices. The validation group periodically evaluates alternative methodologies and recommends improvements to valuation techniques. We perform due diligence reviews of the third party pricing services by comparing their prices with prices from other sources and reviewing other control documentation. Additionally, when necessary, we challenge prices from third party vendors to ensure reasonableness of prices through a pricing challenge process. This may include a request for a transparency of the assumptions used by the third party. The FVC, which includes representation from business areas, our Risk Management division and our Finance division, is a forum for discussing fair valuations, inputs, assumptions, methodologies, variance thresholds, valuation control environment and material risks or concerns related to fair valuations. Additionally, the FVC is empowered to resolve valuation disputes between the primary valuation providers and the valuations control group. It provides guidance and oversight to ensure an appropriate valuation control environment. The FVC regularly reviews and approves our valuation methodologies to ensure that our methodologies and practices are consistent with industry standards and adhere to regulatory and accounting guidance. The Chief Financial Officer determines when material issues or concerns regarding valuations shall be raised to the Audit and Risk Committee or other delegated committee of the Board of Directors. We have a model policy, established by an independent Model Risk Office, which governs the validation of models and related supporting documentation to ensure the appropriate use of models for pricing. Representation and Warranty Reserve In connection with their sales of mortgage loans, certain subsidiaries entered into agreements containing varying representations and warranties about, among other things, the ownership of the loan, the validity of the lien securing the loan, the loan compliance with any applicable loan criteria established by the purchaser, including underwriting guidelines and the ongoing existence of mortgage insurance, and the loan compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws. We may be required to repurchase the mortgage loan, indemnify the investor or insurer, or reimburse the investor for loan and lease losses incurred on the loan in the event of a material breach of contractual representations or warranties. We have established representation and warranty reserves for losses that we consider to be both probable and reasonably estimable associated with the mortgage loans sold by each subsidiary, including both litigation and 55 Table of Contents non-litigation liabilities. The reserve-setting process relies heavily on estimates, which are inherently uncertain, and requires the application of judgment. In establishing the representation and warranty reserves, we consider a variety of factors, depending on the category of purchaser and rely on historical data. These factors include, but are not limited to, the historical relationship between loan losses and repurchase outcomes; the percentage of current and future loan defaults that we anticipate will result in repurchase requests over the lifetime of the loans; the percentage of those repurchase requests that we anticipate will result in actual repurchases; and estimated collateral valuations. We evaluate these factors and update our loss forecast models on a quarterly basis to estimate our lifetime liability. Our aggregate representation and warranty mortgage repurchase reserves, which we report as a component of other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets, totaled $899 million as of December 31, 2012, compared with $943 million as of December 31, 2011. The adequacy of the reserves and the ultimate amount of losses incurred by us or one of our subsidiaries will depend on, among other things, actual future mortgage loan performance, the actual level of future repurchase and indemnification requests, the actual success rates of claimants, developments in litigation, actual recoveries on the collateral and macroeconomic conditions (including unemployment levels and housing prices). As part of our business planning processes, we have considered various outcomes relating to the potential future representation and warranty liabilities of our subsidiaries that are reasonably possible but do not rise to the level of being both probable and reasonably estimable outcomes justifying an incremental accrual under applicable accounting standards. As of December 31, 2012, our best estimate of reasonably possible future losses from representation and warranty claims beyond what is in our reserve was approximately $2.7 billion, an increase from our previous estimates of $1.7 billion as of September 30, 2012, and $1.5 billion as of December 31, 2011. Notwithstanding our ongoing attempts to estimate a reasonably possible amount of future losses beyond our current accrual levels based on current information, it is possible that actual future losses will exceed both the current accrual level and our current estimate of the amount of reasonably possible losses. This estimate involves considerable judgment, and reflects that there is still significant uncertainty regarding the numerous factors that may impact the ultimate loss levels, including, but not limited to, anticipated litigation outcomes, future repurchase and indemnification claim levels, ultimate repurchase and indemnification rates, future mortgage loan performance levels, actual recoveries on the collateral and macroeconomic conditions (including unemployment levels and housing prices). In light of the significant uncertainty as to the ultimate liability our subsidiaries may incur from these matters, an adverse outcome in one or more of these matters could be material to our results of operations or cash flows for any particular reporting period. See Note 21 Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees for additional information. Customer Rewards Reserve We offer products, primarily credit cards, which offer reward program members with various rewards, such as cash, airline tickets or merchandise. The majority of our rewards do not expire and there is no limit on the number of reward points an eligible card member may earn. Customer rewards costs, which we generally record as an offset to interchange income, are driven by various factors, such as card member charge volume, customer participation in the rewards program and contractual arrangements with redemption partners. We establish a customer rewards reserve that reflects management judgment regarding rewards earned that are expected to be redeemed and the estimated redemption cost. We use financial models to estimate ultimate redemption rates of rewards earned to date by current card members based on historical redemption trends, current enrollee redemption behavior, card product type, year of program enrollment, enrollment tenure and card spend levels. Our current assumption is that the vast majority of all rewards earned will eventually be redeemed. We use a weighted-average cost per reward redeemed during the previous twelve months, adjusted as appropriate for recent changes in redemption costs, including mix of rewards redeemed, to estimate future redemption costs. 56 Table of Contents We continually evaluate our reserve methodology and assumptions based on developments in redemption patterns, cost per point redeemed, contract changes and other factors. Changes in the ultimate redemption rate and weighted-average cost per point have the effect of either increasing or decreasing the reserve through the current period provision by an amount estimated to cover the cost of all points previously earned but not yet redeemed by card members as of the end of the reporting period. We recognized customer rewards expense of $1.3 billion, $1.0 billion and $760 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Our customer rewards liability, which is included in other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets, totaled $2.1 billion and $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Income Taxes Our annual provision for income tax expense is based on our income, statutory tax rates and other provisions of tax law applicable to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment, including evaluating uncertainties, is required in determining our tax positions and calculating our tax expense. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Our income tax expense consists of two components: current and deferred taxes. Our current income tax expense approximates taxes to be paid or refunded for the current period. It also includes income tax expense related to our uncertain tax positions and revisions of our estimate of accrued income taxes resulting from the resolution of income tax controversies. Our deferred income tax expense results from changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities between periods. Deferred tax assets and liabilities represent decreases or increases in taxes expected to be paid in the future because of future reversals of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are recognized subject to management judgment that realization is more likely than not. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions by assessing the adequacy of expected taxable income from all sources, including taxable income in carryback years, reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income rely heavily on estimates. We use our historical experience and our short- and long-range business forecasts to provide insight. We had deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities and valuation allowances, of $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2012, compared with $2.3 billion at December 31, 2011. We had a valuation allowance of $123 million and $89 million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. We expect to fully realize in future periods the net deferred tax asset of $2.9 billion recorded as of December 31, 2012. If changes in circumstances lead us to change our judgment about our ability to realize deferred tax assets in future years, we will adjust our valuation allowances in the period that our change in judgment occurs and record a corresponding increase or charge to income. We provide additional information on income taxes in Consolidated Results of Operations and in Note 18 Income Taxes. ACCOUNTING CHANGES AND DEVELOPMENTS See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for information on accounting standards adopted in 2012, as well as recently issued accounting standards not yet required to be adopted and the expected impact of these changes in accounting standards. To the extent we believe the adoption of new accounting standards has had or will have a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition or liquidity, we discuss the impacts in the applicable sections(s) of MD&A. 57 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The section below provides a comparative discussion of our reported consolidated results of operations between 2012 and 2011 and between 2011 and 2010. Following this section, we provide a discussion of our business segment results. You should read this section together with our Executive Summary and Business Outlook, where we discuss trends and other factors that we expect will affect our future results of operations. Net Interest Income Net interest income represents the difference between the interest income and applicable fees earned on our interest-earning assets, which include loans held for investment and investment securities, and the interest expense on our interest-bearing liabilities, which include interest-bearing deposits, senior and subordinated notes, securitized debt and other borrowings. We include in interest income any past due fees on loans that we deem are collectible. Our net interest margin represents the difference between the yield on our interest-earning assets and the cost of our interest-bearing liabilities, including the impact of non-interest bearing funding. We expect net interest income and our net interest margin to fluctuate based on changes in interest rates and changes in the amount and composition of our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. 58 Table of Contents Table 2 below presents, for each major category of our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the average outstanding balances, interest income earned or interest expense incurred, and average yield or cost for 2012, 2011 and 2010. Table 2: Average Balances, Net Interest Income and Net Interest Yield (1) Year Ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 (Dollars in millions) Average Balance Interest Income/ Expense (2) Yield/ Rate Average Balance Interest Income/ Expense (2) Yield/ Rate Average Balance Interest Income/ Expense (2 ) Yield/ Rate Assets: Interest-earning assets: Credit card: (3) Domestic $ 71,754 $ 10,153 14.15 % $ 53,465 $ 7,562 14.14 % $ 55,133 $ 7,951 14.42 % International 8,255 1,292 15.66 8,645 1,359 15.72 7,499 1,212 16.16 Credit card 80,009 11,445 14.31 62,110 8,921 14.36 62,632 9,163 14.63 Consumer banking (4) 71,836 4,509 6.28 34,838 3,343 9.60 35,925 3,245 9.11 Commercial banking 35,913 1,528 4.25 31,274 1,482 4.74 29,764 1,503 5.05 Other 157 55 35.03 202 28 13.86 205 23 11.22 Total loans held for investment 187,915 17,537 9.33 128,424 13,774 10.73 128,526 13,934 10.84 Investment securities 57,424 1,329 2.31 39,513 1,137 2.88 39,489 1,342 3.40 Other interest-earning assets 9,740 98 1.01 7,328 76 1.04 7,668 77 1.00 Total interest-earning assets $ 255,079 $ 18,964 7.43 % $ 175,265 $ 14,987 8.55 % $ 175,683 $ 15,353 8.74 % Cash and due from banks 4,573 1,926 2,132 Allowance for loan and lease losses (4,640 ) (4,865 ) (7,257 ) Premises and equipment, net 3,342 2,731 2,718 Other assets 28,248 24,661 26,838 Total assets $ 286,602 $ 199,718 $ 200,114 Liabilities and stockholders equity: Interest-bearing liabilities: Deposits $ 183,314 $ 1,403 0.77 % $ 109,644 $ 1,187 1.08 % $ 104,743 $ 1,465 1.40 % Securitized debt obligations 14,138 271 1.92 20,715 422 2.04 34,185 809 2.37 Senior and subordinated notes 11,012 345 3.13 9,244 300 3.25 8,571 276 3.22 Other borrowings 12,875 356 2.77 8,063 337 4.18 6,864 346 5.04 Total interest-bearing liabilities $ 221,339 $ 2,375 1.07 % $ 147,666 $ 2,246 1.52 % $ 154,363 $ 2,896 1.88 % Non-interest bearing deposits 19,741 17,050 14,267 Other liabilities 8,196 6,423 6,543 Total liabilities 249,275 171,139 175,173 Stockholders equity 37,327 28,579 24,941 Total liabilities and stockholders equity $ 286,602 $ 199,718 $ 200,114 Net interest income/spread $ 16,589 6.36 % $ 12,741 7.03 % $ 12,457 6.86 % Impact of non-interest bearing funding 0.14 0.24 0.23 Net interest margin 6.50 % 7.27 % 7.09 % (1) Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. (2) Past due fees included in interest income totaled approximately $1.7 billion, $1.1 billion and $1.1 billion in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Premium amortization related to the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions reduced net interest income by $391 million in 2012. (3) Credit card loans consist of domestic and international credit card loans and installment loans. (4) Consumer banking loans consist of auto, home and retail banking loans. 59 Table of Contents Table 3 displays the change in our net interest income between periods and the extent to which the variance is attributable to: (i) changes in the volume of our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities or (ii) changes in the interest rates of these assets and liabilities. T able 3: Rate/Volume Analysis of Net Interest Income (1) 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 Total Variance Variance Due to Total Variance Variance Due to (Dollars in millions) Volume Rate Volume Rate Interest income: Loans held for investment: Credit card $ 2,524 $ 2,561 $ (37 ) $ (242 ) $ (76 ) $ (166 ) Consumer banking 1,166 2,624 (1,458 ) 98 (100 ) 198 Commercial banking 46 207 (161 ) (21 ) 74 (95 ) Other 27 (7 ) 34 5 5 Total loans held for investment 3,763 5,385 (1,622 ) (160 ) (102 ) (58 ) Investment securities 192 445 (253 ) (205 ) 1 (206 ) Other 22 24 (2 ) (1 ) (3 ) 2 Total interest income 3,977 5,854 (1,877 ) (366 ) (105 ) (261 ) Interest expense: Deposits 216 635 (419 ) (278 ) 66 (344 ) Securitized debt obligations (151 ) (127 ) (24 ) (387 ) (286 ) (101 ) Senior and subordinated notes 45 56 (11 ) 24 22 2 Other borrowings 19 158 (139 ) (9 ) 55 (64 ) Total interest expense 129 722 (593 ) (650 ) (143 ) (507 ) Net interest income $ 3,848 $ 5,132 $ (1,284 ) $ 284 $ 38 $ 246 (1) We calculate the change in interest income and interest expense separately for each item. The change in net interest income attributable to both volume and rates is allocated based on the relative dollar amount of each item. Net interest income of $16.6 billion for 2012 increased by $3.8 billion, or 30%, from 2011, driven by a 46% increase in average interest-earning assets, which was partially offset by an 11% (77 basis points) decline in our net interest margin to 6.50%. Average Interest-Earning Assets : The significant increase in average interest-earning assets reflects the addition of the ING Direct loan portfolio of $40.4 billion in the first quarter of 2012 and the addition of the $27.8 billion in outstanding receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and designated as held for investment in the second quarter of 2012. Growth in average-interest earning assets also was driven by strong commercial loan growth and continued growth in auto loans, which was partially offset by the continued expected run-off of installment loans in our Credit Card business and home loans in our Consumer Banking business, as well as the expected run-off of higher-margin, higher-loss receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. The run-off of home loans has accelerated slightly as a result of the low mortgage interest rate environment. Net Interest Margin : The decrease in our net interest margin was attributable to a decline in the average yield on our interest-earning assets, largely due to the shift in the mix of our interest-earning assets to a larger proportion of lower yielding assets resulting from the acquired ING Direct home loan and investment security portfolios and temporarily higher cash balances from the recent equity and debt offerings. The ING Direct interest-earning assets generally have lower yields than our legacy loan and investment security portfolios. In addition, the establishment of a finance charge and fee reserve of $174 million in the second quarter of 2012 for the receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and premium amortization related to the ING 60 Table of Contents Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions of $391 million in 2012 contributed to the reduction in the average yield on interest-earning assets. The decrease in the average yield on interest-earnings assets was partially offset by a reduction in our cost of funds. We have continued to benefit from the shift in the mix of our funding to lower cost consumer and commercial banking deposits from higher cost wholesale sources and a decline in deposit interest rates as a result of the continued overall low interest rate environment. Net interest income of $12.7 billion for 2011 increased by $284 million, or 2%, from 2010, driven by a 3% (18 basis points) expansion in our net interest margin to 7.27%, which was partially offset by a modest decrease in average interest-earning assets. Average Interest-Earning Assets : The decrease in average interest-earning assets in 2011 reflected the continued run-off of businesses that we exited or repositioned, including our installment, home loan and small-ticket commercial real estate loan portfolios, which was slightly offset by the impact of modest revolving credit card loan growth, the addition of the existing HBC credit card loan portfolio of $1.4 billion in the first quarter of 2011 and the addition of the existing Kohl private-label credit card loan portfolio of $3.7 billion in the second quarter of 2011. Net Interest Margin : The increase in our net interest margin in 2011 reflected the favorable impact of a reduction in cost of funds, which was partially offset by the unfavorable impact of a decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets. The improvement in our cost of funds was attributable the shift in the mix of our funding to lower cost consumer and commercial banking deposits from higher cost wholesale sources and a decline in deposit interest rates as a result of the overall low interest rate environment. The decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets was largely due to the addition of the Kohl portfolio. Under our partnership agreement with Kohl s, we share a fixed percentage of revenues, consisting of finance charges and late fees. We report revenues related to Kohl credit card loans on a net basis in our consolidated financial statements, which has the effect of reducing the yield on our average interest-earning assets. The reduction in the average yield due to the addition of the Kohl portfolio was partially offset by the run-off of lower margin installment loans, a reduced level of new accounts with low introductory promotional rates and an increase in the recognition of billed finance charges and fees due to improved credit performance as well as a change we made in the third quarter of 2011 in our estimation of the uncollectible finance charge and fee reserve. Non-Interest Income Non-interest income primarily consists of service charges and other customer-related fees, interchange income (net of rewards expense), other non-interest income and, in 2012, the bargain purchase gain attributable to the ING Direct acquisition. The other component of non-interest income includes the provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses related to continuing operations. Other also includes gains and losses from the sale of investment securities, gains and losses on derivatives not accounted for in hedge accounting relationships and hedge ineffectiveness, which we generally do not allocate to our business segments because they relate to centralized asset/liability and market risk management activities undertaken by our Corporate Treasury group. 61 Table of Contents Table 4 displays the components of non-interest income for 2012, 2011 and 2010. Table 4: Non-Interest Income Year Ended December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Service charges and other customer-related fees $ 2,106 $ 1,979 $ 2,073 Interchange fees, net 1,647 1,318 1,340 Bargain purchase gain (1) 594 Net other-than-temporary impairment ( OTTI ) (52 ) (21 ) (65 ) Other non-interest income: Provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses (2) (42 ) (43 ) (204 ) Net gains from the sale of investment securities 45 259 141 Net fair value gains (losses) on free-standing derivatives (3) (4) (36 ) (197 ) 51 Other (5) 545 243 378 Other non-interest income 512 262 366 Total non-interest income $ 4,807 $ 3,538 $ 3,714 (1) Represents the amount by which the fair value of the net assets acquired in the ING Direct acquisition, as of the acquisition date of February 17, 2012, exceeded the consideration transferred. (2) We recorded a total provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses of $349 million, $212 million and $636 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The remaining portion of the provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses is included, net of tax, in discontinued operations. (3) Includes mark-to-market derivative losses of $78 million and $277 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively, related to interest-rate swaps we entered into in 2011 to partially hedge the interest rate risk of the net assets associated with the expected ING Direct acquisition. (4) Excludes net cumulative credit risk valuation adjustments of $9 million, $23 million and $20 million as of December 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively, related to derivatives in a gain position. See Note 11 Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities for additional information. (5) Other includes derivative hedge ineffectiveness losses of $36 million in 2012 and gains of $15 million and $50 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Other also includes income of $162 million in 2012 related to the sale of Visa stock shares. Non-interest income of $4.8 billion in 2012 increased by $1.3 billion, or 36%, from non-interest income of $3.5 billion in 2011. This increase reflected the combined impact of: (i) the bargain purchase gain of $594 million recorded at acquisition of ING Direct; (ii) increased net interchange and other fees resulting from continued growth and market share from new account originations, due in part to the ING Direct and the 2012 U.S. card acquisitions; (iii) income of $162 million from the sale of Visa stock shares in the first quarter of 2012; and (iv) mark-to-market gains of $85 million recognized on retained interests in mortgage-related securities. The favorable impact of these items was partially offset by expected customer refunds of approximately $115 million related to cross-sell activities in our Domestic Card business, approximately $214 million lower net gains from the sale of AFS securities recorded in 2012 versus 2011, and a mark-to-market derivative loss of $78 million recognized in the first quarter of 2012 related to the settlement of interest-rate swaps we entered into in 2011 to partially hedge the interest rate risk of the net assets associated with the ING Direct acquisition. Non-interest income of $3.5 billion in 2011 decreased by $176 million, or 5%, from non-interest income of $3.7 billion in 2010. This decrease was attributable to: (i) the absence of a one-time pre-tax gain of $128 million recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and net gains on the sale of securities in 2010; and (ii) the impact of contra-revenue amounts recorded in the second and fourth quarters of 2011, including a provision of $102 million for anticipated refunds to U.K. customers related to retrospective regulatory requirements pertaining to payment protection insurance ( PPI ) in our U.K. business. The decrease was partially offset by increased customer fees related to treasury management and public financing activities, and the decrease in the provision for mortgage loan repurchases. 62 Table of Contents We recorded net OTTI losses of $52 million, $21 million and $65 million in 2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively. These OTTI losses resulted from the deterioration in the credit quality of certain non-agency mortgage-backed securities due to the prolonged weakness in the housing market and fragile economic recovery. We provide additional information on other-than-temporary impairment recognized on our available-for-sale securities in Note 4 Investment Securities. Provision for Credit Losses We build our allowance for loan and lease losses and unfunded lending commitment reserves through the provision for credit losses. Our provision for credit losses in each period is driven by charge-offs and the level of allowance for loan and lease losses that we determine is necessary to provide for probable loan and lease losses incurred that are inherent in our loan portfolio as of each balance sheet date. We recorded a provision for credit losses of $4.4 billion in 2012, compared with $2.4 billion in 2011 and $3.9 billion in 2010. The provision for credit losses as a percentage of net interest income was 26.6%, 18.5% and 31.4% in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The increase in the provision for credit losses of $2.0 billion in 2012 from 2011 was primarily related to the addition of the $26.2 billion in outstanding receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition designated as held for investment that had existing revolving privileges at acquisition. These loans were recorded at a fair value of $26.9 billion, resulting in a net premium of $705 million at acquisition. Fair value was determined by discounting all expected cash flows (contractual principal, interest, finance charges and fees of $33.3 billion less those amounts not expected to be collected of $3.0 billion) at a market discount rate. Under applicable accounting guidance, we are required to amortize the net premium of $705 million over the contractual principal amount as an adjustment to interest income over the remaining life of the loans. Given the guidance applicable to revolving loans, it is necessary to record an allowance through provision for credit losses to properly recognize an estimate of incurred losses on the existing principal balances, which represents a portion of the total amounts not expected to be collected described above. In the second quarter of 2012, we recorded a provision for credit losses of $1.2 billion to establish an initial allowance primarily related to these loans. The allowance was calculated using the same methodology utilized for determining the allowance for our existing credit card loan portfolio. The provision for credit losses, excluding the initial allowance build of $1.2 billion related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, was $3.2 billion in 2012. The increase in the provision for credit losses, excluding the impact of the initial allowance build related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, was largely attributable to the growth in auto and commercial loan originations, coupled with the absence of the allowance release for our Credit Card business recorded in 2011. The decrease in the provision for credit losses of $1.5 billion in 2011 from 2010 was largely driven by a substantial decline in net charge-offs across all of our business segments, reflecting a continued improvement in the credit performance of our loan portfolio. On October 29, 2012, Hurricane Sandy made landfall on the New Jersey coast, resulting in severe disaster in coastal counties in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York and varying degrees of damage and disruption in other Northeast and Mid-Atlantic states. Because we have significant consumer and commercial loan exposure in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York, the storm and its aftermath resulted in an elevated risk of loss for us within this region. Based on our assessment of the impact of Hurricane Sandy on our loan portfolio, we recorded an allowance of $39 million as of December 31, 2012, which is included in our total allowance for loan and lease losses of $5.2 billion as of December 31, 2012. We provide additional information on the provision for credit losses and changes in the allowance for loan and lease losses under the Credit Risk Profile Summary of Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses and Note 6 Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses. For information on our allowance methodology, see Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. 63 Table of Contents Non-Interest Expense Non-interest expense consists of ongoing operating costs, such as salaries and associate benefits, occupancy and equipment costs, professional services, communications and data processing technology expenses, and other miscellaneous expenses. Non-interest expense also includes marketing costs, merger-related expense and amortization of intangibles. Table 5 displays the components of non-interest expense for 2012, 2011 and 2010. Table 5: Non-Interest Expense (Dollars in millions) Year Ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Salaries and associate benefits $ 3,876 $ 3,023 $ 2,594 Occupancy and equipment 1,327 1,025 1,001 Marketing 1,364 1,337 958 Professional services 1,270 1,198 919 Communications and data processing 778 681 693 Amortization of intangibles 609 222 220 Merger-related expense 336 45 81 Other non-interest expense: Collections 544 563 626 Fraud losses 190 122 80 Bankcard, regulatory and other fee assessments 525 394 352 Other 1,127 722 410 Total other non-interest expense 2,386 1,801 1,468 Total non-interest expense $ 11,946 $ 9,332 $ 7,934 Non-interest expense of $11.9 billion for 2012 increased $2.6 billion, or 28%, from 2011. The increase was primarily due to higher operating expenses and merger-related costs related to our recent acquisitions, increased salaries and associate benefits attributable to increased headcount, higher infrastructure costs attributable to acquired businesses and our continued investment in our auto loan business and increased amortization of intangibles resulting from the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions. We recorded PCCR intangible amortization expense related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition of $334 million in 2012. We recorded other asset and intangible amortization expense related to the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions of $147 million in 2012. Non-interest expense of $9.3 billion for 2011 increased $1.4 billion, or 18%, from 2010. The increase was attributable to increased marketing expenditures as we expanded our marketing efforts to attract and support targeted customers and new business volume through a variety of channels, higher legal expenses and increased operating expenses. The increase in operating expenses was largely due to the integration of the acquisitions of the Sony, HBC and Kohl loan portfolios and continued investment in our infrastructure. Income Taxes We recorded an income tax provision based on income from continuing operations of $1.3 billion (25.8% effective income tax rate) in 2012, compared with an income tax provision of $1.3 billion (29.1% effective income tax rate) in 2011 and income tax provision of $1.3 billion (29.6% effective tax rate) in 2010. Our effective tax rate on income from continuing operations varies between periods due, in part, to fluctuations in our pre-tax earnings, which affects the relative tax benefit of tax-exempt income, tax credits and other permanent tax items. The decrease in our effective income tax rate in 2012 from 2011 reflected an increase in the amount of one-time tax benefits recorded in 2012 compared with the prior year. In 2012, we recorded discrete tax benefits of $252 64 Table of Contents million, primarily related to the non-taxable ING Direct bargain purchase gain of $594 million, a one-time deferred tax benefit for changes in our state tax position resulting from the assets and operations of the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and consolidation of ING Bank, fsb with our existing banking operations, and the resolution of certain tax issues and audits. In comparison, in 2011 we recorded discrete tax benefits of $121 million, primarily related to the release of valuation allowances against certain state deferred tax assets and net operating loss carry-forwards, as well as the resolution of certain tax issues and audits. Similarly, the decrease in our effective income tax rate in 2011 from 2010 reflected an increase in the amount of one-time tax benefits recorded in 2011 compared with the prior year. In 2011, we recorded discrete tax benefits of $121 million, primarily related to the release of valuation allowances against certain state deferred tax assets and net operating loss carry-forwards, as well as the resolution of certain tax issues and audits. In 2010, we recorded discrete tax benefits of $84 million, primarily related to adjustments for the resolution of certain tax issues and audits. Our effective income tax rate excluding the benefit from these discrete tax items was 30.9%, 31.7% and 31.5% for 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The decrease in our effective income tax rate excluding the impact of discrete items in 2012 from 2011 was primarily due to an increase in affordable housing and other business tax credits. We provide additional information on items affecting our income taxes and effective tax rate in Note 18 Income Taxes. Loss from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax Loss from discontinued operations reflects ongoing costs, which primarily consist of mortgage loan repurchase representation and warranty charges related to the mortgage origination operations of GreenPoint wholesale mortgage banking unit, which we closed in 2007. We recorded a loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, of $217 million, $106 million and $307 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The variance in the loss from discontinued operations between 2012 and 2011 and between 2011 and 2010 is attributable to the provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses. We recorded a total pre-tax provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses of $349 million, $212 million and $636 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The portion of these amounts included in loss from discontinued operations totaled $307 million ($194 million net of tax) in 2012, $169 million ($120 million net of tax) in 2011 and $432 million ($304 million net of tax) in 2010. We provide additional information on the provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses and the related reserve for potential representation and warranty claims in Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates and Note 21 Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees. BUSINESS SEGMENT FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE Our principal operations are currently organized into three major business segments, which are defined based on the products and services provided or the type of customer served: Credit Card, Consumer Banking and Commercial Banking. The operations of acquired businesses have been integrated into our existing business segments. Certain activities that are not part of a segment, such as management of our corporate investment portfolio and asset/liability management by our centralized Corporate Treasury group, are included in the Other category. The results of our individual businesses, which we report on a continuing operations basis, reflect the manner in which management evaluates performance and makes decisions about funding our operations and allocating 65 Table of Contents resources. Our business segment results are intended to reflect each segment as if it were a stand-alone business. We use an internal management and reporting process to derive our business segment results. Our internal management and reporting process employs various allocation methodologies, including funds transfer pricing, to assign certain balance sheet assets, deposits and other liabilities and their related revenue and expenses directly or indirectly attributable to each business segment. Total interest income and net fees are directly attributable to the segment in which they are reported. The net interest income of each segment reflects the results of our funds transfer pricing process, which is primarily based on a matched maturity method that takes into consideration market rates. Our funds transfer pricing process provides a funds credit for sources of funds, such as deposits generated by our Consumer Banking and Commercial Banking businesses, and a funds charge for the use of funds by each segment. The allocation process is unique to each business segment and acquired businesses. We may periodically change our business segments or reclassify business segment results based on modifications to our management reporting methodologies and changes in organizational alignment. In the first quarter of 2012, we re-aligned the loan categories reported by our Commercial Banking business and the loan customer and product types included within each category. As a result of this re-alignment, we now report three product categories: commercial and multifamily real estate, commercial and industrial loans and small-ticket commercial real estate, which is a run-off portfolio. We previously reported four categories within our Commercial Banking business: commercial and multifamily real estate, middle market, specialty lending and small-ticket commercial real estate. Middle market and specialty lending related products are included in commercial and industrial loans. All affordable housing tax-related investments, some of which were previously included in the Other segment, are now included in the commercial and multifamily real estate category of our Commercial Banking business. Prior period amounts have been recast to conform to the current period presentation. We refer to the business segment results derived from our internal management accounting and reporting process as our managed presentation, which differs in some cases from our reported results prepared based on U.S. GAAP. There is no comprehensive, authoritative body of guidance for management accounting equivalent to U.S. GAAP; therefore, the managed basis presentation of our business segment results may not be comparable to similar information provided by other financial service companies. In addition, our individual business segment results should not be used as a substitute for comparable results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Below we summarize our business segment results for 2012, 2011 and 2010 and provide a comparative discussion of these results. We also discuss changes in our financial condition and credit performance statistics as of December 31, 2012, compared with December 31, 2011. We provide additional information on the allocation methodologies used to derive our business segment results and a reconciliation of our total business segment results to our reported consolidated results in Note 20 Business Segments. We provide information on the outlook for each of our business segments above under Executive Summary and Business Outlook. Credit Card Business Our Credit Card business generated income from continuing operations of $1.5 billion in 2012 and $2.3 billion in both 2011 and 2010. The primary sources of revenue for our Credit Card business are interest income and non-interest income from customers and interchange fees. Expenses primarily consist of ongoing operating costs, such as salaries and associate benefits, occupancy and equipment, professional services, communications and data processing technology expenses, as well as marketing expenses. Significant acquisitions affecting the results of our Credit Card business include: (i) the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, which added approximately $27.8 billion in outstanding credit card receivables designated as held for investment to our Domestic Card business at closing; (ii) the acquisition of the existing Kohl credit card loan portfolio, which added approximately $3.7 billion of loans to our Domestic Card business at acquisition; and (iii) the acquisition of the existing HBC loan portfolio, which added approximately $1.4 billion of loans to our International Card business at acquisition. These acquisitions include partnership agreements with third parties to 66 Table of Contents offer private-label-credit cards, a substantial majority of which are not for general use and are limited to the products and services sold by the private-label partner. We provide information on the accounting for acquisitions and partnership agreements in Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. Table 6 summarizes the financial results of our Credit Card business, which is comprised of Domestic Card, including installment loans, and International Card operations, and displays selected key metrics for the periods indicated. Table 6: Credit Card Business Results (Dollars in millions) Year Ended December 31, Change 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 2012 2011 2010 Selected income statement data: Net interest income (1) $ 10,182 $ 7,822 $ 7,894 30 % (1 )% Non-interest income 3,078 2,609 2,720 18 (4 ) Total net revenue (2) 13,260 10,431 10,614 27 (2 ) Provision for credit losses 4,061 1,870 3,188 117 (41 ) Non-interest expense 6,854 5,035 3,951 36 27 Income from continuing operations before income taxes 2,345 3,526 3,475 (33 ) 1 Income tax provision 815 1,249 1,201 (35 ) 4 Income from continuing operations, net of tax $ 1,530 $ 2,277 $ 2,274 (33 )% * *% Selected performance metrics: Average loans held for investment (3) $ 80,009 $ 62,110 $ 62,632 29 % (1 )% Average yield on loans held for investment (4) 14.31 % 14.36 % 14.63 % (5 )bps (27 )bps Total net revenue margin (5) 16.57 16.79 16.95 (22 ) (16 ) Net charge-off rate (6) 3.68 4.92 8.79 (124 ) (387 ) Net charge-off rate (excluding acquired loans) (7) 3.69 4.92 8.79 (123 ) (387 ) PCCR intangible amortization (8) $ 350 $ 21 $ 1,567 % % Purchase volume (9) 180,599 135,120 106,912 34 26 December 31, 2012 2011 Change Selected period-end data: Loans held for investment: (3) $ 91,755 $ 65,075 41 % 30+ day performing delinquency rate (10) 3.61 % 3.86 % (25 )bps 30+ day delinquency rate (11) 3.69 3.86 (17 ) 30+ day delinquency rate (excluding acquired loans) (7) 3.62 3.86 (24 ) Nonperforming loan rate (12) 0.11 Allowance for loan and lease losses $ 3,979 $ 2,847 40 % ** Change is less than one percent or not meaningful. (1) Includes premium amortization related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition of $159 million for 2012. (2) We recognize billed finance charges and fee income on open-ended loans in accordance with the contractual provisions of the credit arrangements and estimate the uncollectible amount on a quarterly basis. The estimated uncollectible amount of billed finance charges and fees is reflected as a reduction in revenue and is not included in our net charge-offs. Total net revenue was reduced by $937 million, $371 million and $950 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, for the estimated uncollectible amount of billed finance charges and fees. (3) Credit card period-end loans held for investment and average loans held for investment include accrued finance charges and fees, net of the estimated uncollectible amount. 67 Table of Contents (4) Calculated by dividing interest income for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (5) Calculated by dividing total net revenue for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (6) Calculated by dividing net charge-offs for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. The net charge-off rate for 2012 reflects a cumulative adjustment we made in November 2012 related to the timing of charge-offs for delinquent U.K. loans for which revolving privileges have been revoked as part of a loan workout. We previously charged off such loans in the period the account became 180 days past due. Effective November 2012, we began charging off these loans in the period that the account becomes 120 days past due, consistent with our charge-off practice for installment loans. (7) Calculation of ratio adjusted to exclude from the denominator acquired loans accounted for subsequent to acquisition based on expected cash flows to be collected. See Item 6. Selected Financial Data, Credit Risk Profile and Note 5 Loans Credit Quality for additional information on the impact of acquired loans on our credit quality metrics. (8) Includes amortization expense of $334 million in 2012 related to the purchased credit card relationships intangible asset of $2.2 billion recorded in connection with the closing on May 1, 2012 of the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. (9) Consists of purchase transactions for the period, net of returns. Excludes cash advance transactions. (10) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day performing delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. (11) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. (12) Calculated by loan category by dividing nonperforming loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. Nonperforming credit card loans generally include international loans that are 90 or 120 days delinquent. Key factors affecting the results of our Credit Card business for 2012, compared with 2011 included the following: Net Interest Income : Net interest income increased by $2.4 billion, or 30%, in 2012, primarily attributable to the substantial increase in average loans held for investment resulting from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition in the second quarter of 2012, which was partially offset by a modest reduction in average loan yields due to the establishment of a finance charge and fee reserve for the loans acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and net premium amortization related to these loans. Non-Interest Income : Non-interest income increased by $469 million, or 18%, in 2012. The increase was primarily driven by higher net interchange fees generated from purchase volume growth and customer-related fees resulting from the addition of customer accounts associated with the 2012 U.S. card acquisition in the second quarter of 2012. This increase was partially offset by charges of approximately $115 million expected refunds to customers affected by certain cross-sell activities in our Domestic Card business and the discontinuance of revenue recognition for billings to customers affected by the cross-sell activities. Provision for Credit Losses : The provision for credit losses related to our Credit Card business increased to $4.1 billion in 2012, from $1.9 billion in 2011. The significant increase in the provision in 2012 was primarily driven by the provision of $1.2 billion recorded in the second quarter of 2012 to establish an allowance for the receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition with revolving privileges. We recorded an additional provision for credit losses for these loans of $107 million in the second half of 2012. The provision for credit losses, excluding the allowance build related to the receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, totaled $2.8 billion in 2012, reflecting a relative stabilization in credit performance improvement compared to significant credit performance improvement in 2011 that resulted in a large allowance release of $1.2 billion in 2011. Non-Interest Expense: Non-interest expense increased by $1.8 billion, or 36%, in 2012. The increase was largely due to higher operating expenses resulting from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and the amortization of intangibles and other assets associated with the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, including PCCR intangible amortization expense of $334 million in 2012. Other items contributing to the increase in non-interest expense include merger-related expenses associated with the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, expense of $75 million recognized in the first quarter of 2012 for expected customer refunds attributable to issues associated with cross-selling certain other products to credit card customers, regulatory fines of $60 million related to cross-sell activities in the Domestic Card business and expense of $98 million for net litigation reserves to cover interchange and other legal matters in the second quarter of 2012. 68 Table of Contents Total Loans : Period-end loans in our Credit Card business increased by $26.7 billion, or 41%, in 2012, to $91.8 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase was primarily due to the addition of the $27.8 billion in outstanding receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition classified as held for investment. Excluding the addition of these receivables, period-end loans held for investment decreased by $1.1 billion, or 2%, due to the expected continued run-off of our installment loan portfolio as well as the expected run-off of higher-margin, higher-loss receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. Charge-off and Delinquency Statistics: Our reported net charge-off rate decreased to 3.68% in 2012, from 4.92% in 2011. Our reported charge-offs reflect the absence of charge-offs for the receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected over the life of the loans as the credit mark established at acquisition is expected to absorb uncollectible contractual amounts. The decrease in the net-charge off rates was due in part to the addition of loans acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition to the denominator in calculating our reported charge-off rates and the lag in the impact of charge-offs related to these loans, as described above under Executive Summary and Business Outlook. The 30+ day delinquency rate decreased to 3.69% as of December 31, 2012, from 3.86% as of December 31, 2011 . Key factors affecting the results of our Credit Card business for 2011, compared with 2010 included the following: Net Interest Income : Net interest income decreased by $72 million, or 1%, in 2011, reflecting the impact of a 1% decline in average loan balances. The expected run-off of the installment loan portfolio was the primary driver of the decline in average loan balances in 2011, more than offsetting the increase from the additions of the HBC and Kohl portfolios. Non-Interest Income : Non-interest income decreased by $111 million, or 4%, in 2011. The decrease reflects the impact of contra-revenue amounts, including a provision of $102 million for anticipated refunds to U.K. customers related to retrospective regulatory requirements pertaining to payment protection insurance ( PPI ) in our U.K. business and the recognition of expenses related to the periodic adjustment of our customer rewards points liability to reflect the estimated cost of points earned to date that are ultimately expected to be redeemed. These decreases were partially offset by higher net interchange fees during 2011, attributable to increased purchase volume. Provision for Credit Losses : The provision for credit losses related to our Credit Card business decreased by $1.3 billion in 2011, to $1.9 billion. The decrease was primarily attributable to a continued improvement in credit performance, including reduced delinquency rates, lower bankruptcy losses and a significant decrease in charge-offs. Net charge-offs declined by $2.4 billion to $3.1 billion in 2011, from $5.5 billion in 2010, which, as indicated below, resulted in a decrease in the net charge-off rate to 4.92% in 2011, from 8.79% in 2010. Non-Interest Expense : Non-interest expense increased by $1.1 billion, or 27%, in 2011. The increase was attributable to increased marketing expenditures as we expanded our marketing efforts to drive new business volume through a variety of channels, higher legal expenses and increased operating costs. In addition, we recorded expense of $40 million in relation to regulatory requirements pertaining to PPI in our U.K. business. Total Loans : Period-end loans in our Credit Card business increased by $3.7 billion, or 6%, in 2011, to $65.1 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase was primarily attributable to the acquisitions of the Kohl credit card portfolio of $3.7 billion and the HBC credit card portfolio of $1.4 billion, which were partially offset by the continued run-off of the installment loan portfolio. Charge-off and Delinquency Statistics : Net charge-off and delinquency rates continued to improve in 2011. The net charge-off rate decreased to 4.92% in 2011, from 8.79% in 2010. The 30+ day delinquency rate decreased to 3.86% as of December 31, 2011, from 4.29% as of December 31, 2010. The improvement in the net charge-off and delinquency rates reflected the impact of improved credit quality across our credit card portfolio, tighter underwriting standards implemented over the last several years and ongoing normalization of credit performance in the portfolio. 69 Table of Contents Domestic Card Business Table 6.1 summarizes the financial results for Domestic Card and displays selected key metrics for the periods indicated. Domestic Card accounted for 89% of total revenues for our Credit Card business in 2012, compared with 87% in both 2011 and 2010. Income attributable to Domestic Card represented 92% of income for our Credit Card business for 2012, compared with 102% in 2011 and 83% in 2010. Because our Domestic Card business accounts for the substantial majority of our Credit Card business, the key factors driving the results for this division are similar to the key factors affecting our total Credit Card business. Table 6.1: Domestic Card Business Results (Dollars in millions) Year Ended December 31, Change 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 2012 2011 2010 Selected income statement data: Net interest income (1) $ 9,129 $ 6,717 $ 6,912 36 % (3 )% Non-interest income 2,725 2,368 2,347 15 1 Total net revenue 11,854 9,085 9,259 30 (2 ) Provision for credit losses 3,683 1,317 2,853 180 (54 ) Non-interest expense 5,997 4,153 3,457 44 20 Income from continuing operations before income taxes 2,174 3,615 2,949 (40 ) 23 Income tax provision 770 1,287 1,051 (40 ) 22 Income from continuing operations, net of tax $ 1,404 $ 2,328 $ 1,898 (40 )% 23 % Selected performance metrics: Average loans held for investment (2) $ 71,754 $ 53,464 $ 55,133 34 % (3 )% Average yield on loans held for investment (3) 14.15 % 14.14 % 14.42 % 1 bps (28 )bps Total net revenue margin (4) 16.52 16.99 16.79 (47 ) 20 Net charge-off rate (5) 3.53 4.72 8.91 (119 ) (419 ) Net charge-off rate (excluding acquired loans) (6) 3.54 4.72 8.91 (118 ) (419 ) PCCR intangible amortization (7) $ 350 21 1,567 % * *% Purchase volume (8) 166,694 122,366 98,344 36 24 December 31, 2012 2011 Change Selected period-end data: Loans held for investment (2) $ 83,141 $ 56,609 47 % 30+ day delinquency rate (9) 3.61 % 3.66 % (5 )bps 30+ day delinquency rate (excluding acquired loans) (6) 3.62 3.66 (4 ) Allowance for loan and lease losses $ 3,526 $ 2,375 48 % ** Change is less than one percent or not meaningful. (1) Includes premium amortization related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition of $159 million for 2012. (2) Credit card period-end loans held for investment and average loans held for investment include accrued finance charges and fees, net of the estimated uncollectible amount. (3) Calculated by dividing interest income for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (4) Calculated by dividing total net revenue for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (5) Calculated by dividing net charge-offs for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. 70 Table of Contents (6) Calculation of ratio adjusted to exclude from the denominator acquired loans accounted for subsequent to acquisition based on expected cash flows to be collected. See Item 6. Selected Financial Data, Credit Risk Profile and Note 5 Loans Credit Quality for additional information on the impact of acquired loans on our credit quality metrics. (7) Includes amortization expense of $334 million in 2012 related to the purchased credit card relationships intangible asset of $2.2 billion recorded in connection with the closing on May 1, 2012 of the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. (8) Consists of purchase transactions for the period, net of returns. Excludes cash advance transactions. (9) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. Domestic Card generated net income from continuing operations of $1.4 billion in 2012, compared with net income from continuing operations of $2.3 billion in 2011. The decrease in Domestic Card net income in 2012 from 2011 reflected an increase in total net revenue largely due to the addition of loans from the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, which was more than offset by the unfavorable impact of several items related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition. These items included: (i) a significant increase in the provision for credit losses resulting from an initial allowance build of $1.2 billion related to the portfolio purchased in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition; (ii) an increase in non-interest expense largely resulting from operating expenses related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and the amortization of intangibles and other assets associated with the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, including PCCR intangible amortization expense of $334 million in 2012; and (iii) a regulatory fine related to cross-sell activities of $60 million in 2012. Domestic Card generated net income from continuing operations of $2.3 billion in 2011, compared with net income from continuing operations of $1.9 billion in 2010. The increase in Domestic Card net income from continuing operations in 2011 from 2010 was driven by a significant reduction in the provision for credit losses due to the improvement in credit performance metrics, including decreases in delinquency and charge-off rates. This increase was partially offset by a decline in total revenue attributable to lower average loan balances and an increase in non-interest expense attributable to increased marketing expenditures, higher legal expenses and increased operating costs. International Card Business Table 6.2 summarizes the financial results for International Card and displays selected key metrics for the periods indicated. International Card accounted for 11% of total revenues for our Credit Card business in 2012, compared with 13% in both 2011 and 2010. Income attributable to International Card represented 8% of income for our Credit Card business for 2012 and 17% in 2010. Our International Card business posted a loss that represented 2% of income for our Credit Card business in 2011. 71 Table of Contents Table 6.2: International Card Business Results (Dollars in millions) Year Ended December 31, Change 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 2012 2011 2010 Selected income statement data: Net interest income $ 1,053 $ 1,105 $ 982 (5 )% 13 % Non-interest income 353 241 373 46 (35 ) Total net revenue 1,406 1,346 1,355 4 (1 ) Provision for credit losses 378 553 335 (32 ) 65 Non-interest expense 857 882 494 (3 ) 79 Income from continuing operations before income taxes 171 (89 ) 526 292 (117 ) Income tax provision (benefit) 45 (38 ) 150 218 (125 ) Income (loss) from continuing operations, net of tax $ 126 $ (51 ) $ 376 347 % (114 )% Selected performance metrics: Average loans held for investment (1) $ 8,255 $ 8,645 $ 7,499 (5 )% 15 % Average yield on loans held for investment (2) 15.66 % 15.72 % 16.16 % (6 )bps (44 )bps Total net revenue margin (3) 17.03 15.57 18.07 146 (250 ) Net charge-off rate (4) 4.98 6.18 7.89 (120 ) (171 ) Purchase volume (5) $ 13,905 $ 12,754 $ 8,568 9 % 49 % December 31, 2012 2011 Change Selected period-end data: Loans held for investment (1) $ 8,614 $ 8,466 2 % 30+ day performing delinquency rate (6) 3.58 % 5.18 % (160 )bps 30+ day delinquency rate (7) 4.49 5.18 (69 ) Nonperforming loan rate (8) 1.16 * * Allowance for loan and lease losses $ 453 $ 472 (4 )% ** Change is less than one percent or not meaningful. (1) Credit card period-end loans held for investment and average loans held for investment include accrued finance charges and fees, net of the estimated uncollectible amount. (2) Calculated by dividing interest income for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (3) Calculated by dividing total net revenue for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (4) Calculated by dividing net charge-offs for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. The net charge-off rate for 2012 reflects a cumulative adjustment we made in November 2012 related to the timing of charge-offs for delinquent U.K. loans for which revolving privileges have been revoked as part of a loan workout. We previously charged off such loans in the period the account became 180 days past due. Effective November 2012, we began charging off these loans in the period that the account becomes 120 days past due, consistent with our charge-off practice for installment loans. (5) Consists of purchase transactions for the period, net of returns. Excludes cash advance transactions. (6) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day performing delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. (7) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. (8) Calculated by loan category by dividing nonperforming loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. Nonperforming credit card loans generally include international loans that are 90 or 120 days delinquent. 72 Table of Contents Our International Card business generated net income from continuing operations of $126 million in 2012, compared with a net loss from continuing operations of $51 million in 2011. The International Card net income in 2012, compared with net loss in 2011, was driven by a decrease in the provision for credit losses, attributable to lower net charge-offs resulting from credit improvement in Canada and the U.K., and the absence of an allowance build of $105 million for the HBC loan portfolio we acquired in January 2011. Our International Card business generated a net loss from continuing operations of $51 million in 2011, compared with net income from continuing operations of $376 million in 2010. The International Card net loss in 2011, compared with net income in 2010, was attributable to a decrease in total net revenue resulting from contra-revenue amounts of $174 million recorded in 2011 for anticipated refunds to U.K. customers related to retrospective regulatory requirements pertaining to PPI insurance in our U.K. business and the impact of the addition of the HBC loan portfolio in 2011. The HBC portfolio contributed to an increase in the provision for credit losses and an increase in non-interest expense related to operating costs associated with HBC associates who joined us as a result of the acquisition, which were partially offset by growth in net interest income due from the higher loan balances. Consumer Banking Business Our Consumer Banking business generated net income of $1.4 billion in 2012, compared with net income of $809 million in 2011 and $905 million in 2010. The primary sources of revenue for our Consumer Banking business are net interest income from loans and deposits and non-interest income from customer fees. Expenses primarily consist of ongoing operating costs, such as salaries and associate benefits, occupancy and equipment, professional services and communications and data processing technology expenses, as well as marketing expenditures. The substantial majority of the lending and retail deposit businesses acquired from the ING Direct acquisition on February 17, 2012, which included loans with a carrying value of $40.4 billion and deposits of $84.4 billion at acquisition, are reported in the Consumer Banking segment. 73 Table of Contents Table 7 summarizes the financial results of our Consumer Banking business and displays selected key metrics for the periods indicated. Table 7: Consumer Banking Business Results (Dollars in millions) Change Year Ended December 31, 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 2012 2011 2010 Selected income statement data: Net interest income $ 5,788 $ 4,236 $ 3,727 37 % 14 % Non-interest income 782 720 870 9 (17 ) Total net revenue 6,570 4,956 4,597 33 8 Provision for credit losses 589 452 241 30 88 Non-interest expense 3,871 3,244 2,950 19 10 Income from continuing operations before income taxes 2,110 1,260 1,406 67 (10 ) Income tax provision 747 451 501 66 (10 ) Income from continuing operations, net of tax $ 1,363 $ 809 $ 905 68 % (11 )% Selected performance metrics: Average loans held for investment: (1) Auto $ 24,976 $ 19,419 $ 17,551 29 % 11 % Home loan 42,764 11,322 13,629 278 (17 ) Retail banking 4,096 4,097 4,745 * * (14 ) Total consumer banking $ 71,836 $ 34,838 $ 35,925 106 % (3 )% Average yield on loans held for investment (2) 6.28 % 9.60 % 9.11 % (332 )bps 49 bps Average deposits $ 162,637 $ 86,883 $ 78,083 87 % 11 % Average deposit interest rate 0.70 % 0.96 % 1.19 % (26 )bps (23 )bps Core deposit intangible amortization $ 159 $ 132 $ 144 20 % (8 )% Net charge-off rate (3) 0.74 % 1.39 % 1.82 % (65 )bps (43 )bps Net charge-off rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 1.45 1.59 2.17 (14 ) (58 ) Auto loan originations $ 15,960 $ 12,476 $ 7,764 28 % 61 % (Dollars in millions) December 31, Change 2012 2011 Selected period-end data: Loans held for investment: (1) Auto $ 27,123 $ 21,779 25 % Home loan 44,100 10,433 323 Retail banking 3,904 4,103 (5 ) Total consumer banking $ 75,127 $ 36,315 107 % 30+ day performing delinquency rate (5) 2.65 % 4.47 % (182 )bps 30+ day performing delinquency rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 5.14 5.06 8 30+ day delinquency rate (6) 3.34 5.99 (265 ) 30+ day delinquency rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 6.49 6.78 (29 ) Nonperforming loan rate (7) 0.85 1.79 (94 ) Nonperforming loan rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 1.66 2.03 (37 ) Nonperforming asset rate (8) 0.91 1.94 (103 ) Nonperforming asset rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 1.76 2.20 (44 ) Allowance for loan and lease losses $ 711 $ 652 9 % Deposits 172,396 88,540 95 Loans serviced for others 15,333 17,998 (15 ) 74 Table of Contents ** Change is less than one percent or not meaningful. (1) Loans held for investment includes loans acquired in the ING Direct and Chevy Chase Bank acquisitions. The carrying value of consumer banking acquired loans accounted for subsequent to acquisition based on expected cash flows to be collected was $36.5 billion and $4.2 billion as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The average balance of consumer banking loans held for investment, excluding the carrying value of acquired loans, was $36.7 billion, $30.3 billion and $30.2 billion in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. (2) Calculated by dividing interest income for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (3) Calculated by dividing net charge-offs for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (4) Calculation of ratio adjusted to exclude from the denominator acquired loans accounted for subsequent to acquisition based on expected cash flows to be collected. See Item 6. Selected Financial Data, Credit Risk Profile and Note 5 Loans Credit Quality for additional information on the impact of acquired loans on our credit quality metrics. (5) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day performing delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. (6) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. (7) Calculated by loan category by dividing nonperforming loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. Nonperforming loans generally include loans that have been placed on nonaccrual status and certain restructured loans whose contractual terms have been restructured in a manner that grants a concession to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty. (8) Calculated by loan category by dividing nonperforming assets as of the end of the period by period-end nonperforming assets. Nonperforming assets consist of nonperforming loans, real estate owned ( REO ) and other foreclosed assets. Key factors affecting the results of our Consumer Banking business for 2012, compared with 2011, included the following: Net Interest Income : Net interest income increased by $1.6 billion, or 37%, in 2012. The increase was primarily attributable to the addition of home loans from the ING Direct acquisition, continued growth and strong margin performance in our auto loan portfolio and the addition of low-rate deposits from the ING Direct acquisition. With the addition of deposits from ING Direct, average deposits increased to $162.6 billion in 2012, from $86.9 billion in 2011, while the average deposit interest rate fell to 0.70% in 2012, from 0.96% in 2011. The favorable impact from these items was modestly offset by the expected run-off of acquired home loans. Non-Interest Income : Non-interest income increased by $62 million, or 9%, in 2012. The increase was primarily attributable to mark-to-market gains on retained interests in interest-only strips and negative amortization mortgage securities recognized in the third quarter of 2012. Provision for Credit Losses : The provision for credit losses increased by $137 million in 2012 to $589 million. The increase was largely due to higher auto loan balances, which more than offset the benefit from lower net charge-off rates and continued credit performance improvement. We recorded an allowance build of $59 million in 2012, compared with an allowance release of $23 million in 2011. As discussed above in Item 6. Selected Financial Data, the substantial majority of the ING Direct home loan portfolio is accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected over the life of the loans. Because the credit mark established at acquisition for these loans takes into consideration future credit losses expected to be incurred, there are no charge-offs or an allowance associated with these loans unless the estimated cash flows expected to be collected decrease subsequent to acquisition. Non-Interest Expense : Non-interest expense increased by $627 million, or 19%, in 2012. The increase was largely attributable to operating expenses related to ING Direct, merger-related expenses associated with the acquisition and higher infrastructure expenditures resulting from continued investments in the home loan business and growth in auto loan balances as a result of increased auto loan originations. Total Loans : Period-end loans in the Consumer Banking business increased by $38.8 billion, or 107%, in 2012 to $75.1 billion as of December 31, 2012, primarily due to the acquisition of $40.4 billion of ING Direct home loans and growth in auto loan originations, which were partially offset by the expected continued run-off of our acquired home loan portfolios. 75 Table of Contents Deposits : Period-end deposits in the Consumer Banking business increased by $83.9 billion, or 95%, in 2012 to $172.4 billion as of December 31, 2012, primarily due to the addition of ING Direct deposits of $84.4 billion. Charge-off and Delinquency Statistics : The net charge-off rate decreased to 0.74% in 2012, from 1.39% in 2011. The 30+ day delinquency rate decreased to 3.34% as of December 31, 2012, from 5.99% as of December 31, 2011. The improvement in our reported net charge-off and delinquency rates for our Consumer Banking business reflects the impact of the addition of the ING Direct home loan portfolio. As discussed above, because the credit mark established at acquisition for these loans takes into consideration future credit losses expected to be incurred, there are no charge-offs or an allowance associated with these loans unless the estimated cash flows expected to be collected decrease subsequent to acquisition. In addition, these loans are not classified as delinquent or nonperforming even though the customer may be contractually past due because we expect that we will fully collect the carrying value of these loans. The overall improvement in credit quality metrics, excluding acquired loans, reflects improved credit performance in our legacy consumer loan portfolios. Key factors affecting the results of our Consumer Banking business for 2011, compared with 2010, included the following: Net Interest Income: Net interest income increased by $509 million, or 14%, in 2011. The primary drivers of the increase in net interest income were improved loan margins attributable to an increase in average loan yields, coupled with a decrease in the cost of funds. The increase in loan yields reflected the shift in product mix as we replaced the legacy home loan run-off with higher yielding auto loans. The decrease in the cost of funds reflected reduced deposit interest rates due to the prevailing low interest rate environment, combined with our disciplined pricing. Average interest on deposits decreased to 0.96% in 2011 from 1.19% in 2010 while period end deposits grew by 7% in 2011 compared to 2010. Non-Interest Income: Non-interest income decreased by $150 million, or 17%, in 2011. The decrease in non-interest income was primarily attributable to the combined impact of the absence of a net gain of $128 million recorded in the first quarter of 2010 related to the deconsolidation of certain option-adjustable rate mortgage trusts that were consolidated on January 1, 2010 as a result of our adoption of the new consolidation accounting standards, and the absence of an impairment charge on mortgage servicing rights recorded in the second quarter of 2010. Provision for Credit Losses: The provision for credit losses increased by $211 million in 2011 to $452 million. Although we experienced continued improvement in credit performance in our Consumer Banking business, including reduced net charge-off rates, we recorded a higher provision for loan and lease losses in 2011 relative to 2010 due to the absence of significant allowance releases that we experienced in 2010, growth in our auto loan portfolio and an increase in the allowance for home equity loans we acquired from Chevy Chase Bank. Non-Interest Expense: Non-interest expense increased by $294 million, or 10%, in 2011. The increase was largely attributable to the recognition of expense for contingent payments related to recent acquisitions, higher infrastructure expenditures resulting from investments in our home loan business, growth in auto originations and modestly higher marketing expenditures in our retail banking operations. Total Loans: Period-end loans in the Consumer Banking business increased by $1.9 billion, or 6%, in 2011 to $36.3 billion as of December 31, 2011, primarily due to growth in auto loans that was partially offset by the continued run-off of our legacy home loan portfolios. Deposits: Period-end deposits in the Consumer Banking business increased by $5.6 billion, or 7%, in 2011 to $88.5 billion as of December 31, 2011, reflecting the impact of our strategy to replace maturing higher cost wholesale funding sources with lower cost funding sources and our continued retail marketing efforts to attract new business to meet this objective. Charge-off and Delinquency Statistics: The net charge-off rate decreased to 1.39% in 2011, from 1.82% in 2010. The 30+ day delinquency rate was 5.99% as of December 31, 2011, compared with 5.96% as of 76 Table of Contents December 31, 2010. The improvement in the net charge-off rate reflected the impact from strong underlying credit performance trends and higher credit quality of more recent auto loan vintages, as well as favorable benefits from elevated auction prices. Commercial Banking Business Our Commercial Banking business generated net income from continuing operations of $835 million in 2012, compared with net income from continuing operations of $595 million and $204 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. The primary sources of revenue for our Commercial Banking business are net interest income from loans and deposits and non-interest income from customer fees. Because we have some affordable housing tax-related investments that generate tax-exempt income or tax credits, we make certain reclassifications to our Commercial Banking business results to present revenues on a taxable-equivalent basis. Expenses primarily consist of ongoing operating costs, such as salaries and associate benefits, occupancy and equipment, professional services and communications and data processing technology expenses, as well as marketing expenditures. Table 8 summarizes the financial results of our Commercial Banking business and displays selected key metrics for the periods indicated. Table 8: Commercial Banking Business Results (Dollars in millions) Change Year Ended December 31, 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 2012 2011 2010 Selected income statement data: Net interest income $ 1,740 $ 1,596 $ 1,450 9 % 10 % Non-interest income 340 283 185 20 53 Total net revenue 2,080 1,879 1,635 11 15 Provision for credit losses (270 ) 31 435 (971 ) (93 ) Non-interest expense 1,059 925 884 14 5 Income from continuing operations before income taxes 1,291 923 316 40 192 Income tax provision 456 328 112 39 193 Income from continuing operations, net of tax $ 835 $ 595 $ 204 40 % 192 % Selected performance metrics: Average loans held for investment: (1) Commercial and multifamily real estate $ 16,256 $ 14,166 $ 13,712 15 % 3 % Commercial and industrial 18,304 15,437 14,058 19 10 Total commercial lending 34,560 29,603 27,770 17 7 Small-ticket commercial real estate 1,353 1,671 1,994 (19 ) (16 ) Total commercial banking $ 35,913 $ 31,274 $ 29,764 15 % 5 % Average yield on loans held for investment (2) 4.25 % 4.74 % 5.05 % (49 )bps (31 )bps Average deposits $ 28,266 $ 25,033 $ 22,228 13 % 13 % Average deposit interest rate 0.32 % 0.49 % 0.66 % (17 )bps (17 )bps Core deposit intangible amortization $ 34 $ 40 $ 55 (15 )% (27 )% Net charge-off rate (3) 0.12 % 0.57 % 1.31 % (45 )bps (74 )bps Net charge-off rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 0.12 0.58 1.34 (46 )bps (76 )bps 77 Table of Contents (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2012 2011 Change Selected period-end data: Loans held for investment: (1) Commercial and multifamily real estate $ 17,732 $ 15,736 13 % Commercial and industrial 19,892 17,088 16 Total commercial lending 37,624 32,824 15 Small-ticket commercial real estate 1,196 1,503 (20 ) Total commercial banking $ 38,820 $ 34,327 13 % Nonperforming loan rate (5) 0.73 % 1.08 % (35 )bps Nonperforming loan rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 0.73 1.10 (37 ) Nonperforming asset rate (6) 0.77 1.17 (40 ) Nonperforming asset rate (excluding acquired loans) (4) 0.78 1.18 (40 ) Allowance for loan and lease losses $ 433 $ 715 (39 )% Deposits 29,866 26,683 12 ** Change is less than one percent or not meaningful. (1) Loans held for investment includes loans acquired in the ING Direct and Chevy Chase Bank acquisitions. The carrying value of commercial banking acquired loans accounted for subsequent to acquisition based on expected cash flows to be collected was $359 million and $481 million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The average balance of commercial banking loans held for investment, excluding the carrying value of acquired loans, was $35.1 billion, $30.8 billion and $29.1 billion in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. (2) Calculated by dividing interest income for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (3) Calculated by dividing net charge-offs for the period by average loans held for investment during the period for the specified loan category. (4) Calculation of ratio adjusted to exclude from the denominator acquired loans accounted for subsequent to acquisition based on expected cash flows to be collected. See Item 6. Selected Financial Data, Credit Risk Profile and Note 5 Loans Credit Quality for additional information on the impact of acquired loans on our credit quality metrics. (5) Calculated by loan category by dividing nonperforming loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category. Nonperforming loans generally include loans that have been placed on nonaccrual status and certain restructured loans whose contractual terms have been restructured in a manner that grants a concession to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty. (6) Calculated by loan category by dividing nonperforming assets as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment, REO, and other foreclosed assets for the specified loan category. Key factors affecting the results of our Commercial Banking business for 2012, compared with 2011, included the following: Net Interest Income: Net interest income increased by $144 million, or 9%, in 2012. The increase was primarily driven by higher deposit balances and growth in commercial real estate and commercial and industrial loans. Non-Interest Income: Non-interest income increased by $57 million or 20%, in 2012, largely attributable to growth in fees from ancillary services provided to customers and a gain of $7 million recorded in the third quarter of 2012 on the sale of certain real-estate investment projects. Provision for Credit Losses: The provision for credit losses was a negative $270 million in 2012, compared with a provision of credit losses of $31 million in 2011. The negative provision in 2012 reflected a significant decrease in net charge-offs, resulting in an increase in allowance releases attributable to the improvement in underlying credit performance trends. We recorded a release of the combined allowance for loan losses and reserve for unfunding lending commitments of $313 million in 2012, compared with a release of $156 million in 2011. 78 Table of Contents Non-Interest Expense: Non-interest expense increased by $134 million, or 14%, in 2012. The increase was due to costs associated with higher originations in our commercial real estate and commercial and industrial businesses, expansion into new markets and infrastructure investments. Total Loans: Period-end loans increased by $4.5 billion, or 13%, in 2012 to $38.8 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase was driven by stronger loan originations in the commercial and industrial and commercial real estate businesses, which was partially offset by the run-off and sale of a portion of the small-ticket commercial real estate loan portfolio. Deposits: Period-end deposits in the Commercial Banking business increased by $3.2 billion, or 12%, in 2012 to $29.9 billion as of December 31, 2012, driven by our strategy to strengthen existing relationships and increase liquidity from commercial customers. Charge-off Statistics: The net charge-off rate decreased to 0.12% in 2012, from 0.57% in 2011. The nonperforming loan rate decreased to 0.73% as of December 31, 2012, from 1.08% as of December 31, 2011. The significant improvement in the credit metrics in our Commercial Banking business reflected a continued improvement in credit trends and strengthening of underlying collateral values, resulting in lower loss severities and opportunities for recoveries on previously charged-off loans. Key factors affecting the results of our Commercial Banking business for 2011, compared with 2010, included the following: Net Interest Income: Net interest income increased by $146 million, or 10%, in 2011. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in average loans and deposits and continued improvement in deposit pricing. Non-Interest Income: Non-interest income increased by $98 million, or 53%, in 2011. The increase was largely attributable to growth in fees and the absence of a loss of $18 million recognized in 2010 from the sale of a legacy portfolio of small-ticket commercial real estate loans. Provision for Credit Losses: The provision for credit losses was $31 million in 2011, compared with $435 million in 2010. The significant reduction in the provision for credit losses in 2011 was attributable to lower loss severities resulting from improvements in underlying collateral asset values. As a result, we recorded a release of the combined allowance for loan losses and reserve for unfunding lending commitments of $156 million in 2011. In comparison, we increased the combined allowance by $48 million in 2010. Non-Interest Expense: Non-interest expense increased by $41 million, or 5%, in 2011, driven by growth in loan originations and other real-estate investments. Total Loans: Period-end loans increased by $4.4 billion, or 15%, in 2011 to $34.3 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase was driven by stronger loan originations in the commercial real estate and industrial businesses, which was partially offset by the run-off and sale of a portion of the small-ticket commercial real estate loan portfolio. Deposits: Period-end deposits in the Commercial Banking business increased by $4.0 billion, or 18%, in 2011 to $26.7 billion as of December 31, 2011, driven by our strategy to strengthen existing relationships and increase liquidity from commercial customers. Charge-off and Nonperforming Loan Statistics: The net charge-off rate decreased to 0.57% in 2011, from 1.31% in 2010. The nonperforming loan rate decreased to 1.08% as of December 31, 2011, from 1.65% as of December 31, 2010. The improvement in the net charge-off and nonperforming loan rates was attributable to slowly improving underlying credit trends and improvements in underlying collateral asset values. Other Category Net income from continuing operations recorded in Other was $6 million in 2012, compared with a net loss from continuing operations of $428 million and $333 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Other includes the 79 Table of Contents residual impact of the allocation of our centralized Corporate Treasury group activities, such as management of our corporate investment portfolio and asset/liability management, to our business segments. Accordingly, net gains and losses on our investment securities portfolio and certain trading activities are included in the Other category. The Other category also includes foreign exchange-rate fluctuations related to the revaluation of foreign currency-denominated investments; certain gains (losses) on the sale and securitization of loans; unallocated corporate expenses that do not directly support the operations of the business segments or for which the business segments are not considered financially accountable in evaluating their performance, such as acquisition and restructuring charges; provisions for representation and warranty reserves related to continuing operations; certain material items that are non-recurring in nature; and offsets related to certain line-item reclassifications. Table 9: Other Results Year Ended December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Selected income statement data: Net interest income (expense) $ (1,121 ) $ (913 ) $ (614 ) Non-interest income 607 (74 ) (61 ) Total net revenue (514 ) (987 ) (675 ) Provision for credit losses 35 7 43 Non-interest expense 162 128 149 Loss from continuing operations before income taxes (711 ) (1,122 ) (867 ) Income tax benefit (717 ) (694 ) (534 ) Income (loss) from continuing operations, net of tax $ 6 $ (428 ) $ (333 ) December 31, 2012 2011 Change Loans held for investment $ 187 $ 175 7 % Deposits 10,223 13,003 (21 ) The Other category shifted to net income from continuing operations of $6 million in 2012, from a net loss of $428 million in 2011. The $434 million shift was largely due to the recognition of the bargain purchase gain of $594 related to the ING Direct acquisition in 2012, which was partially offset by a derivative loss of $78 million recognized in 2012 related to the interest rate swaps we entered into in 2011 to partially hedge the interest rate risk of the net assets associated with the expected ING Direct acquisition. The Other category had a net loss from continuing operations $428 million in 2011, compared with a net loss of $333 million in 2010. The increased loss in 2011 was primarily attributable to a derivative loss of $277 million related to the interest rate swaps we entered into in 2011 to partially hedge the interest rate risk of the net assets associated with the expected ING Direct acquisition. We believe the interest-rate swaps related to the acquisition were effective in meeting our hedging objective. 80 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS Total assets of $312.9 billion as of December 31, 2012 increased by $106.9 billion, or 52%, from $206.0 billion as of December 31, 2011. Total liabilities of $272.4 billion as of December 31, 2012, increased by $96.1 billion, or 54%, from $176.4 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase in total assets and total liabilities was largely attributable to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions previously discussed. Stockholders equity increased by $10.8 in 2012, to $40.5 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase in stockholders equity was attributable to our net income of $3.5 billion in 2012, and $6.8 billion of capital raised from equity issuances in 2012. For information about our capital requirements, see Capital Management below. Following is a discussion of material changes in the major components of our assets and liabilities in 2012. Period-end balance sheet amounts may vary from average balance sheet amounts due to liquidity and balance sheet management activities that are intended to ensure the adequacy of capital while managing our ability to manage liquidity requirements for the company and our customers and our market risk exposure in accordance with our risk appetite. Investment Securities Substantially all of our investment securities were classified as available for sale as of December 31, 2012, and all of our investment securities were classified as available for sale as of December 31, 2011. Investment Securities classified as available for sale are reported in our consolidated balance sheets at fair value. Our portfolio of investment securities available for sale, which had a fair value of $64.0 billion and $38.8 billion, as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, consisted primarily of the following: U.S. Treasury and U.S. agency debt obligations; agency and non-agency mortgage-backed securities ( MBS ); other asset-backed securities, and other investments. Based on fair value, investments in U.S. Treasury, agency securities and other securities explicitly or implicitly guaranteed by the U.S. Government represented 77% of our total investment securities available for sale as of December 31, 2012, compared with 69% as of December 31, 2011. We also had $9 million of investment securities as of December 31, 2012, which we purchased in 2012 and classified as held to maturity. These securities are included in other assets in our consolidated balance sheets. 81 Table of Contents Table 10 presents the amortized cost and fair value for the major categories of our portfolio of investment securities available for sale as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. Table 10: Investment Securities Available for Sale December 31, 2012 2011 2010 (Dollars in millions) Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value U.S. Treasury debt obligations $ 1,548 $ 1,552 $ 115 $ 124 $ 373 $ 386 U.S. agency debt obligations (1) 1,304 1,314 131 138 301 314 Residential mortgage-backed securities ( RMBS ): Agency (2) 39,408 40,002 24,980 25,488 27,980 28,504 Non-agency 3,607 3,871 1,340 1,162 1,826 1,700 Total RMBS 43,015 43,873 26,320 26,650 29,806 30,204 Commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ): Agency (2) 6,045 6,144 697 711 44 45 Non-agency 1,425 1,485 459 476 Total CMBS 7,470 7,629 1,156 1,187 44 45 Other asset-backed securities (3) 8,393 8,458 10,119 10,150 9,901 9,966 Other securities (4) 1,120 1,153 462 510 563 622 Total securities available for sale $ 62,850 $ 63,979 $ 38,303 $ 38,759 $ 40,988 $ 41,537 (1) Includes debt securities issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac with an amortized cost of $300 million, $130 million and $200 million as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and fair value of $302 million, $137 million and $213 million as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The remaining balance consists of debt explicitly or implicitly guaranteed by the U.S. Government. (2) Includes MBS issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae, each of which individually exceeded 10% of our stockholders equity as of the end of each reported period. Fannie Mae MBS had an amortized cost of $22.9 billion, $12.3 billion and $17.1 billion as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and a fair value of $23.2 billion, $12.6 billion and $17.3 billion as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Freddie Mac MBS had an amortized cost of $12.6 billion, $8.9 billion and $8.1 billion as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and a fair value of $12.9 billion, $9.1 billion and $8.3 billion as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Ginnie Mae MBS had an amortized cost of $9.9 billion, $4.5 billion and $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and a fair value of $10.0 billion, $4.5 billion and $3.0 billion as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. (3) This portfolio was collateralized by approximately 64% credit card loans, 18% auto dealer floor plan inventory loans and leases, 6% auto loans, 1% student loans, 5% equipment loans, 2% commercial paper, and 4% other as of December 31, 2012. In comparison, the distribution was approximately 75% credit card loans, 11% auto dealer floor plan inventory loans and leases, 6% auto loans, 4% student loans, 2% equipment loans, and 2% other as of December 31, 2011. Approximately 82% of the securities in our other asset-backed security portfolio were rated AAA or its equivalent as of December 31, 2012, compared with 86% as of December 31, 2011. ( 4) Includes foreign government/agency bonds, covered bonds, municipal securities and equity investments primarily related to CRA activities. Our portfolio of investment securities available for sale increased by $25.2 billion, or 65%, in 2012. The increase was primarily attributable to the acquisition of ING Direct investment securities of $30.2 billion as of the acquisition date, which was partially offset by the sale of investment securities of approximately $16.9 billion. We recorded a net gain of $45 million from the sale of these securities. Unrealized gains and losses on our portfolio of investment securities available for sale are recorded net of tax as a component of AOCI. We had gross unrealized gains of $1.2 billion and gross unrealized losses of $120 million on available-for sale investment securities as of December 31, 2012, compared with gross unrealized gains of $683 million and gross unrealized losses of $227 million as of December 31, 2011. The decrease in gross unrealized losses in 2012 was primarily driven by a tightening of credit spreads, attributable to an improvement 82 Table of Contents in credit performance and increased liquidity, and continued lower interest rates. Of the $120 million in gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2012, $43 million related to securities that had been in a loss position for more than 12 months. We provide information on OTTI losses recognized in earnings on our investment securities above under Consolidated Results of Operations Non-Interest Income. Credit Ratings Our portfolio of investment securities available for sale continues to be concentrated in securities that generally have lower credit risk and high credit ratings, such as securities issued and guaranteed by the U.S. Treasury and other government sponsored enterprises or agencies. Approximately 91% of our total investment securities portfolio was rated AA+ or its equivalent, or higher, as of both December 31, 2012 and 2011. Approximately 6% and 4% were below investment grade as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. We categorize the credit ratings of our investment securities based on the lowest credit rating as issued by the rating agencies Standard & Poor Ratings Services ( S&P ), Moody Investors Service ( Moody ) and Fitch Ratings ( Fitch ). Table 11 provides information on the credit ratings of our non-agency RMBS, non-agency CMBS, other asset-backed securities and other securities as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 11: Non-Agency Investment Securities Credit Ratings December 31, 2012 2011 (Dollars in millions) Amortized Cost AAA Other Investment Grade Below Investment Grade or Not Rated Amortized Cost AAA Other Investment Grade Below Investment Grade or Not Rated Non-agency RMBS $ 3,607 % 5 % 95 % $ 1,340 % 3 % 97 % Non-agency CMBS 1,425 97 3 459 92 8 Other asset-backed securities 8,393 82 17 1 10,119 86 14 Other 1,120 67 24 9 462 4 45 51 For additional information on our investment securities, see Note 4 Investment Securities. Loans Held for Investment Table 12 summarizes loans held for investment by business segment, net of the allowance for loan and lease losses, as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 12: Net Loans Held for Investment December 31, 2012 2011 (Dollars in millions) Total Loans Held for Investment Allowance Net Loans Held for Investment Total Loans Held for Investment Allowance Net Loans Held for Investment Credit card $ 91,755 $ 3,979 $ 87,776 $ 65,075 $ 2,847 $ 62,228 Consumer banking 75,127 711 74,416 36,315 652 35,663 Commercial banking 38,820 433 38,387 34,327 715 33,612 Other 187 33 154 175 36 139 Total $ 205,889 $ 5,156 $ 200,733 $ 135,892 $ 4,250 $ 131,642 83 Table of Contents Period-end loans held for investment increased by $70.0 billion, or 52%, in 2012 to $205.9 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase was primarily attributable to the addition of the acquired ING Direct loan portfolio of $40.4 billion and receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition of $27.8 billion, each designated as held for investment. Excluding the impact of these loans, period-end loans held for investment increased by $1.8 billion, or 1%. This increase reflected commercial loan growth and continued growth in auto loans, which was partially offset by the continued expected run-off of loans in businesses we exited or repositioned, other loan pay downs and charge-offs. The run-off portfolios include installment loans in our Credit Card business, home loans in our Consumer Banking business and small-ticket commercial real estate loans in our Commercial Banking business. The run-off of home loans has accelerated slightly as a result of the low mortgage interest rate environment. We provide additional information on the composition of our loan portfolio and credit quality below in Credit Risk Profile and in Note 5 Loans. Customer Deposits Our customer deposits have become our largest source of funding for our operations and asset growth, providing a sizeable and consistent source of low-cost funds. Total customer deposits increased by $84.3 billion, or 66%, in 2012, to $212.5 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $128.2 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase in deposits reflects the addition of $84.4 billion in deposits from the ING Direct acquisition and increased retail marketing efforts to attract new business and our continued strategy to leverage our bank outlets to attract lower cost deposit funding. We provide information on the composition of our deposits, average outstanding balances, interest expense and yield below in Liquidity Risk Profile. Securitized Debt Obligations Borrowings owed to securitization investors decreased by $5.1 billion to $11.4 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $16.5 billion as of December 31, 2011. The decrease was attributable to the scheduled maturities of the debt within our credit card securitization trusts. Other Debt Other debt includes federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase, senior and subordinated notes and other borrowings, including junior subordinated debt and Federal Home Loan Bank ( FHLB ) advances. Other debt totaled $38.5 billion as of December 31, 2012, of which $21.1 billion represented short-term borrowings and $17.4 billion represented long-term borrowings. Other debt totaled $23.0 billion as of December 31, 2011, of which $7.3 billion represented short-term borrowings and $15.7 billion represented long-term borrowings. The increase in other debt of $15.5 billion in 2012 was primarily attributable to an increase in FHLB advances of $14.0 billion increase, the majority of which occurred in the fourth quarter of 2012, to meet seasonal loan growth, fund an increase in our investment securities and cover the withdrawal of a portion of the holding company deposits at our banking subsidiaries in anticipation of the January 2, 2013 redemption of the $3.65 billion of trust preferred securities. We provide additional information on our borrowings in Note 10 Deposits and Borrowings. Potential Mortgage Representation & Warranty Liabilities In recent years, we acquired three subsidiaries that originated residential mortgage loans and sold them to various purchasers, including purchasers who created securitization trusts. These subsidiaries are Capital One Home Loans, which was acquired in February 2005; GreenPoint Mortgage Funding, Inc. ( GreenPoint ), which was acquired in December 2006 as part of the North Fork acquisition; and Chevy Chase Bank, which was acquired in February 2009 and subsequently merged into CONA. 84 Table of Contents We have established representation and warranty reserves for losses associated with the mortgage loans sold by each subsidiary that we consider to be both probable and reasonably estimable, including both litigation and non-litigation liabilities. These reserves are reported in our consolidated balance sheets as a component of other liabilities. The reserve setting process relies heavily on estimates, which are inherently uncertain, and requires the application of judgment. We evaluate these estimates on a quarterly basis. We build our representation and warranty reserves through the provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses, which we report in our consolidated statements of income as a component of non-interest income for loans originated and sold by CCB and Capital One Home Loans and as a component of discontinued operations for loans originated and sold by GreenPoint. In establishing the representation and warranty reserves, we consider a variety of factors depending on the category of purchaser. The aggregate reserves for all three subsidiaries totaled $899 million as of December 31, 2012, compared with $919 million as of September 30, 2012, and $943 million as of December 31, 2011. The decrease in the reserve in 2012 was driven primarily by the settlement of claims. The table below summarizes changes in our representation and warranty reserves in 2012 and 2011. Table 13: Changes in Representation and Warranty Reserve Year Ended December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 Representation and warranty repurchase reserve, beginning of period (1) $ 943 $ 816 Provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses (2) 349 212 Net realized losses (393 ) (85 ) Representation and warranty repurchase reserve, end of period (1) $ 899 $ 943 (1) Reported in our consolidated balance sheets as a component of other liabilities. (2) The pre-tax portion of the provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses recognized in our consolidated statements of income as a component of non-interest income totaled $42 million and $43 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. The pre-tax portion of the provision for mortgage representation and warranty losses recognized in our consolidated statements of income as a component of discontinued operations totaled $307 million and $169 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. We provide additional information related to the representation and warranty reserve, including factors that may impact the adequacy of the reserves and the ultimate amount of losses incurred by our subsidiaries, above in Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Representation and Warranty Reserve and in Note 21 Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees. OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS AND VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITIES In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in various types of arrangements with limited liability companies, partnerships or trusts that often involve special purpose entities and variable interest entities ( VIEs ). Some of these arrangements are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheets or may be recorded in amounts different from the full contract or notional amount of the arrangements, depending on the nature or structure of, and accounting required to be applied to, the arrangement. These arrangements may expose us to potential losses in excess of the amounts recorded in the consolidated balance sheets. Our involvement in these arrangements can take many forms, including securitization and servicing activities, the purchase or sale of mortgage-backed or other asset-backed securities in connection with our home loan portfolio and loans to VIEs that hold debt, equity, real estate or other assets. Our continuing involvement in unconsolidated VIEs primarily consists of interests in certain mortgage loan trusts and community reinvestment and development entities. The carrying amount of assets and liabilities of these 85 Table of Contents unconsolidated VIEs was $2.8 billion and $521 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2012, and our maximum exposure to loss was $2.8 billion. We provide a discussion of our activities related to these VIEs in Note 7 Variable Interest Entities and Securitizations. CAPITAL MANAGEMENT The level and composition of our equity capital are determined by multiple factors, including our consolidated regulatory capital requirements and an internal risk-based capital assessment, and may also be influenced by rating agency guidelines, subsidiary capital requirements, the business environment, conditions in the financial markets and assessments of potential future losses due to adverse changes in our business and market environments. Capital Standards and Prompt Corrective Action Bank holding companies and national banks are subject to capital adequacy standards adopted by the Federal Reserve and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ( OCC ), respectively. The capital adequacy standards set forth minimum risk-based and leverage capital requirements that are based on quantitative and qualitative measures of assets and off-balance sheet items. Under the capital adequacy standards, bank holding companies and banks currently are required to maintain a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 8%, a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of at least 4%, and a Tier 1 leverage capital ratio of at least 4% (3% for banks that meet certain specified criteria, including excellent asset quality, high liquidity, low interest rate exposure and the highest regulatory rating) in order to be considered adequately capitalized. National banks also are subject to prompt corrective action capital regulations. Under prompt corrective action regulations, a bank is considered to be well capitalized if it maintains a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of at least 6% (200 basis points higher than the above minimum capital standard), a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 10% (200 basis points higher than the above minimum capital standard), a Tier 1 leverage capital ratio of at least 5% and is not subject to any supervisory agreement, order or directive to meet and maintain a specific capital level for any capital reserve. A bank is considered to be adequately capitalized if it meets these minimum capital ratios and does not otherwise meet the well capitalized definition. Currently, prompt corrective action capital requirements do not apply to bank holding companies. We also disclose a Tier 1 common ratio for our bank holding company, which is a regulatory capital measure widely used by investors, analysts, rating agencies and bank regulatory agencies to assess the capital position of financial services companies. There is currently no mandated minimum or well capitalized standard for the Tier 1 common ratio; instead the risk-based capital rules state that voting common stockholders equity should be the dominant element within Tier 1 common capital. In addition, we disclose a non-GAAP TCE ratio in Item 6. Selected Financial Data. While the Tier 1 common and TCE ratios are capital measures widely used by investors, analysts and bank regulatory agencies to assess the capital position of financial services companies, they may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. We provide information on the calculation of these ratios in Supplemental Tables Table F: Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures and Calculation of Regulatory Capital Measures Under Basel I. 86 Table of Contents Table 14 provides a comparison of our capital ratios under the Federal Reserve capital adequacy standards and the capital ratios of the Banks under the OCC capital adequacy standards as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 14: Capital Ratios Under Basel I (1) December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 Capital Ratio Minimum Capital Adequacy Well Capitalized Capital Ratio Minimum Capital Adequacy Well Capitalized Capital One Financial Corp: (2) Tier 1 common (3) 11.0 % N/A N/A 9.7 % N/A N/A Tier 1 risk-based capital (4) 11.3 4.0 % 6.0 % 12.0 4.0 % 6.0 % Total risk-based capital (5) 13.6 8.0 10.0 14.9 8.0 10.0 Tier 1 leverage (6) 8.7 4.0 N/A 10.1 4.0 N/A Capital One Bank (USA) N.A. ( COBNA ): Tier 1 risk-based capital (4) 11.3 % 4.0 % 6.0 % 11.2 % 4.0 % 6.0 % Total risk-based capital (5) 14.7 8.0 10.0 15.0 8.0 10.0 Tier 1 leverage (6) 10.4 4.0 5.0 10.2 4.0 5.0 Capital One, N.A. ( CONA ): Tier 1 risk-based capital (4) 13.6 % 4.0 % 6.0 % 11.0 % 4.0 % 6.0 % Total risk-based capital (5) 14.9 8.0 10.0 12.2 8.0 10.0 Tier 1 leverage (6) 9.1 4.0 5.0 8.7 4.0 5.0 (1) Calculated under capital standards and regulations based on the international capital framework commonly known as Basel I. Capital ratios that are not applicable are denoted by N/A. (2) The regulatory framework for prompt corrective action does not apply to Capital One Financial Corp. because it is a bank holding company. (3) Tier 1 common ratio is a regulatory capital measure calculated based on Tier 1 common capital divided by risk-weighted assets. (4) Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio is a regulatory capital measure calculated based on Tier 1 capital divided by risk-weighted assets. (5) Total risk-based capital ratio is a regulatory capital measure calculated based on total risk-based capital divided by risk-weighted assets. (6) Tier 1 leverage ratio is calculated based on Tier 1 capital divided by quarterly average total assets, after certain adjustments. We exceeded minimum capital requirements and would meet the well capitalized ratio levels specified under prompt corrective action for Tier 1 risk-based capital, total risk-based capital and Tier 1 leverage under Federal Reserve capital standards for bank holding companies as of December 31, 2012. The Banks also exceeded minimum regulatory requirements under the OCC applicable capital adequacy guidelines and were well capitalized under prompt corrective action requirements as of December 31, 2012. On October 17, 2012, the OCC approved, subject to several conditions, CONA application to merge with ING Bank with CONA surviving the merger. In addition, the OCC approved CONA companion application to reduce capital surplus, which was necessary to manage excess capital levels that would result from the merger. CONA effected the reduction in surplus through a return of capital to Capital One immediately prior to the merger. Capital One effected the merger on November 1, 2012. The merger and reduction in CONA capital surplus had no effect on Capital One total capital. Recent Developments in Capital and Liquidity Requirements As of December 31, 2012, we had outstanding trust preferred securities with a combined aggregate principal amount of $3.65 billion that previously qualified as Tier 1 capital. On January 2, 2013, we redeemed all of our outstanding trust preferred securities, which generally carried a higher coupon cost, ranging from 3.36% to 10.25%, than other funding sources available to us. Pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Tier 1 capital treatment of trust preferred securities is to be phased out over a three year period starting on January 1, 2013. In June 2012, the Federal Reserve, OCC and FDIC released proposed rules that would increase the general risk-based capital ratio minimum requirements, modify the definition of regulatory capital, establish a minimum Tier 87 Table of Contents 1 common ratio requirement, introduce a new capital conservation buffer requirement, and update the prompt corrective action framework to reflect the new regulatory capital minimums. For additional information on recent developments in capital and liquidity requirements that may impact us, including Basel II and Basel III, see Item 1. Business Supervision and Regulation Capital Adequacy. In November 2011, the Federal Reserve finalized capital planning rules applicable to large bank holding companies like us (commonly referred to as Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review or CCAR). Under the rules, bank holding companies with consolidated assets of $50.0 billion or more must submit capital plans to the Federal Reserve on an annual basis and must obtain approval from the Federal Reserve before making most capital distributions. The purpose of the rules is to ensure that large bank holding companies have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks and capital needs to continue operations through times of economic and financial stress. As part of its evaluation of a capital plan, the Federal Reserve will consider the comprehensiveness of the plan, the reasonableness of assumptions and analysis and methodologies used to assess capital adequacy, and the ability of the bank holding company to maintain capital above each minimum regulatory capital ratio and above a Tier 1 common ratio of 5% on a pro forma basis under both expected and stressful conditions throughout a planning horizon of at least nine quarters. We submitted a Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review ( CCAR 2013 ) to the Federal Reserve on January 7, 2013 along with eighteen other large U.S. banking organizations. We expect to incorporate any feedback from our regulators in response to the CCAR 2013 submission in our ongoing capital management planning. Any proposed dividend increase or other capital action must be approved as a part of CCAR. Dividend Policy We paid common stock dividends of $0.05 per share each quarter in 2012. On January 31, 2013, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.05 per share, payable February 22, 2013 to stockholders of record as of February 11, 2013, and a quarterly dividend on the outstanding shares of our 6.00% fixed rate non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, Series B (the Series B Preferred Stock ). Each outstanding share of the Series B Preferred Stock is represented by depositary shares, each representing a 1/40th interest in a share of Series B Preferred Stock. The dividend of $15.00 per share (equivalent to $0.375 per outstanding depositary share) will be paid on March 1, 2013 to stockholders of record at the close of business on February 14, 2013. The declaration and payment of dividends to our stockholders, as well as the amount thereof, are subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors and depend upon our results of operations, financial condition, capital levels, cash requirements, future prospects and other factors deemed relevant by the Board of Directors. As a bank holding company, our ability to pay dividends is largely dependent upon the receipt of dividends or other payments from our subsidiaries. For additional information on dividends, see Item 1. Business Supervision and Regulation Dividends, Stock Purchases and Transfer of Funds. Regulatory restrictions exist that limit the ability of the Banks to transfer funds to our bank holding company. Funds available for dividend payments from COBNA and CONA were $3.3 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2012. Applicable provisions that may be contained in our borrowing agreements or the borrowing agreements of our subsidiaries may limit our subsidiaries ability to pay dividends to us or our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders. See Equity and Debt Offerings and Transactions for more information. There can be no assurance that we will declare and pay any dividends. Equity and Debt Offerings and Transactions On February 16, 2012, we settled forward sale agreements that we entered into with certain counterparties acting as forward purchasers in connection with a public offering of shares of our common stock on July 19, 2011. 88 Table of Contents Pursuant to the forward sale agreements, we issued 40 million shares of our common stock at settlement. After underwriter discounts and commissions, the net proceeds to us were at a forward sale price per share of $48.17 for a total of approximately $1.9 billion. On February 17, 2012, we issued 54,028,086 shares of Capital One common stock with a fair value of $2.6 billion as partial consideration for the equity interests and assets and liabilities associated with the ING Direct acquisition. On March 20, 2012, we closed a public offering of 24,442,706 shares of our common stock which we sold to the underwriters at a per share price of $51.14 for net proceeds of approximately $1.25 billion. In addition, we issued $1.25 billion of our senior notes due 2015 in a public offering which closed on March 23, 2012. We used the net proceeds of these offerings, along with cash sourced from current liquidity, to fund the net consideration payable of $31.1 billion in connection with the 2012 U.S. card acquisition that closed on May 1, 2012. On August 20, 2012, we issued and sold 35,000,000 depositary shares ( Depositary Shares ), each representing a 1/40th interest in a share of Fixed Rate Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series B, $0.01 par value, with a liquidation preference of $25 per Depositary Share (equivalent to $1,000 per share of Series B Preferred Stock) (the Series B Preferred Stock ). Dividends will accrue on the Series B Preferred Stock at a rate of 6% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears. The net proceeds of the offering of the 35,000,000 Depositary Shares were approximately $853 million, after deducting underwriting commissions and offering expenses. Pursuant to the terms of the Series B Preferred Stock, while the Series B Preferred Stock is outstanding, if full dividends for the preceding dividend period on all outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock have not been declared and paid, we will be prohibited from declaring or paying dividends on our common stock and any series of securities then outstanding that rank equally with the Series B Preferred Stock, subject to certain limited exceptions, including for dividends payable solely in shares of our common stock. In addition, while the Series B Preferred Stock is outstanding, if full dividends for the preceding dividend period on all outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock have not been declared and paid, we will be prohibited from repurchasing, redeeming or otherwise acquiring shares of our common stock or shares of any series of securities then outstanding that rank equally with the Series B Preferred Stock, subject to certain limited exceptions. On September 10, 2012, one of the ING Sellers sold 54,028,086 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering, representing all of the shares of common stock we issued to the ING Sellers in connection with the ING Direct acquisition. We did not receive any proceeds from the offering. On November 6, 2012, we closed a public offering of two different series of our senior notes for total proceeds of approximately $1.0 billion. The offering of senior notes included $250 million aggregate principal amount of our Floating Rate Senior Notes due 2015 and $750 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.000% Senior Notes due 2015 resulting in aggregate net proceeds of approximately $994 million. RISK MANAGEMENT Overview Risk management is a critical part of our business model, as all financial institutions are exposed to a variety of risks that can significantly affect their financial performance. Our business activities expose us to eight major categories of risk: credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk, compliance risk, operational risk, legal risk, reputational risk and strategic risk. Credit Risk: Credit risk is the risk of financial loss arising from a borrower or a counterparty inability to meet its financial or contractual obligations. Liquidity Risk: Liquidity risk is the risk that we will not be able to meet our future financial obligations as they come due or invest in future asset growth because of an inability to obtain funds at a reasonable price within a reasonable time period. 89 Table of Contents Market Risk: Market risk is the risk that an institution earnings or the economic value of equity could be adversely impacted by changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, or prices of other financial instruments. Compliance Risk: Compliance risk is the risk of financial loss due to regulatory fines or penalties, restriction or suspension of business activities or costs of mandatory corrective action incurred by not adhering to applicable laws, regulations, principles and supervisory guidance, as well as our own internal standards intended to adhere to these laws and regulations. Operational Risk: Operational risk is the risk of loss, capital impairment, adverse customer experience, or reputation impact resulting from inadequate or failed internal process, people, and systems, or from external events. Legal Risk: Legal risk represents the risk of material adverse impact due to new or changes in laws and regulations; new interpretations of law; the drafting, interpretation and enforceability of contracts; adverse decisions or consequences arising from litigation or regulatory scrutiny; the establishment, management and governance of our legal entity structure; or the failure to seek or follow appropriate legal counsel when needed. Reputation Risk: Reputation Risk is the risk to market value, recruitment and retention of talented associates and maintenance of a loyal customer base due to the negative perceptions of our internal and external stakeholders regarding our business strategies and activities. Strategic Risk: Strategic risk is the risk that results from adverse business decisions, ineffective or inappropriate business plans, or failure to respond to changes in the competitive environment, business cycles, customer preferences, product obsolescence, regulatory environment, business strategy execution, and/or other inherent risks of the business. We discuss below our overall risk management principles, roles and responsibilities, framework and risk appetite. Following this section, we address in more detail the specific procedures, measures and analysis of the major categories of risks that we manage. Risk Management Principles Our risk management framework is intended to identify, assess and mitigate risks that affect or have the potential to affect our business. We target financial returns that compensate us for the amount of risk that we take and avoid excessive risk-taking. Our risk management framework incorporates the Three Lines of Defense risk management model to demonstrate and structure the roles, responsibilities and accountabilities in the organization for taking and managing risk. Using the Three Lines of Defense model, we follow these central guiding principles: The First Line of Defense is comprised of the business areas and staff groups that through their day-to-day business activities take risk on our behalf. As the business owner, the first line is responsible for identifying, assessing, managing and controlling that risk, and for mitigating our overall risk exposure. The Second Line of Defense provides oversight of first line risk taking and management, and is comprised of our Risk Management organization and other staff control functions. The second line assists in determining risk capacity, risk appetite, and the strategies, policies and structure for managing risks. The Third Line of Defense is comprised of our Internal Audit and Credit Review functions. The third line provides independent and objective assurance to senior management and to the Board of Directors that first and second line risk management and internal control systems and its governance processes are well-designed and working as intended. Our approach is reflected in six critical risk management practices of particular importance in the financial services industry due to changing regulatory environments and ongoing economic uncertainty. 90 Table of Contents First, we seek to mitigate liquidity risk strategically and tactically. From a strategic perspective, we have acquired and built deposit gathering businesses and significantly reduced our loan to deposit ratio. From a tactical perspective, we have accumulated a sizeable liquidity reserve comprising cash, high-quality, unencumbered securities, and committed collateralized credit lines and conduit facilities. This combination of funding and liquidity sources facilitates a diverse access to multiple markets and liquidity sources. Second, we recognize that we are exposed to cyclical changes in credit quality. Consequently, we try to ensure our credit portfolio is resilient to economic downturns. Our most important tool in this endeavor is sound underwriting, using what we deem to be conservative assumptions. In unsecured consumer loan underwriting, we generally assume that loans will be subject to an environment in which losses are higher than those prevailing at the time of underwriting. In commercial underwriting, we generally require strong cash flow, collateral and covenants and guarantees. In addition to sound underwriting, we continually monitor our portfolio and take steps to collect or work out distressed loans. Third, we recognize that compliance is more complex and that regulatory and consumer expectations have risen. In response, we have been and will continue to expand the scope and intensity of our compliance and consumer protection activities including developing requirements, approving new products, establishing procedures and controls, training staff and testing the effectiveness of business controls and the overall program. Fourth, we recognize that reputation risk is of particular concern for financial institutions as a result of the aftermath of the recent financial crisis and economic downturn, which has resulted in increased regulation and widespread regulatory changes. Consequently, our Chief Executive Officer and executive team manage both strategic and tactical reputation issues and build our relationships with the government, media and other constituencies to help strengthen the reputations of both our company and industry. Our actions include taking public positions in support of better consumer practices in our industry and, where possible, implementing those practices in our business. Fifth, we recognize the criticality of managing operational risk on a day-to-day basis and have expanded our approach to operational risk management based on the growth and complexity of the company. We are supporting our first line of defense associates with the appropriate operational risk management policy, standards, processes and tools to enable the delivery of safe, sound customer and client experiences. Finally, we recognize that maintaining a strong capital position is essential to our business strategy and competitive position. We also recognize that regulatory and market expectations for the amount and quality of capital are rising. Understanding and managing risks to our capital position is an underlying objective of all our risk programs. Stress testing and economic capital measurement, both of which incorporate inputs from across the risk spectrum, are key tools for evaluating our capital position and risk adjusted returns. We also consider risks to our reputation and to our ability to access capital markets as part of our process for evaluating our capital plans. See MD&A Capital Management for additional information on our capital adequacy and strength. Risk Management Roles and Responsibilities The Board of Directors is responsible for establishing our overall risk framework, approving and overseeing execution of the Enterprise Risk Management Policy and key risk category policies, establishing our risk appetite, and regularly reviewing our risk profile. The Chief Risk Officer, who reports to the Chief Executive Officer, is responsible for overseeing our risk management program and driving appropriate action to resolve any weaknesses. The risk management program begins with a set of policies and risk appetites approved by the Board that are implemented through a system of risk committees and senior executive risk stewards. We have established risk committees at both the corporate and divisional level to identify and manage risk. In addition, we have assigned a senior executive expert to each of eight risk categories. We refer to these experts as risk stewards. These executive risk stewards work with the 91 Table of Contents lines of business, the Chief Risk Officer and the risk committees to identify, aggregate and report risks, develop mitigation plans and controls and remediate issues. The Chief Risk Officer combines the results of these processes to assemble a view of our risk profile. Both management and the Board of Directors regularly review the risk profile. Risk Management Framework We use a consistent risk management framework to manage risk. This framework applies at all levels, from the development of the Enterprise Risk Management Program itself to the tactical operations of the front-line business team. We are continuing to make changes to our risk management framework as we enhance our enterprise-wide compliance risk management programs, including further expanding the Three Lines of Defense model referenced under the Risk Management Principles set forth above. Our risk management framework, which is built around governance, processes and people, currently consists of the following six key elements: Objective Setting Risk Assessment Control Activities Communication and Information Program Monitoring Organization and Culture Objective Setting Our risk management approach begins with objective setting. We establish strategic, financial, operational and other objectives during our strategic and annual planning processes and throughout the year. These objectives cascade through the organization to individual teams of associates. The risk management approach helps identify and manage risks that have the potential to interfere with the achievement of our stated objectives. Risk Assessment Risk results from our strategic business choices and our day-to-day business activities. Risk assessment is the process of identifying our risks (including emerging and potential risks), evaluating the impact of those risks and choosing and executing a response that is guided by our risk appetite. Risk assessment also includes the correlation of risks and the assessment of their cumulative effect on the overall risk profile of a line of business or of the enterprise. Control Activities We consider our control activities to be the day-to-day backbone of our risk management. Controls provide reasonable assurance that legal, regulatory, and business requirements are being met, and identified risks are being mitigated or accepted according to our risk response choices and risk appetite. We have practices in place designed to establish key controls and assess their effectiveness in preventing a breakdown. Control activities include the monitoring of adherence to current policy, process and procedure requirements, sign-offs, and regular reporting to management. They also include the resolution of regulatory and audit findings and issues and the procedures that trigger objective setting and risk assessments when new business opportunities are evaluated or business hierarchy changes occur. Communication and Information Communication and information infrastructures must be solid and are necessary to support the objective setting, risk assessment, and control activities described above. Robust risk management requires well-functioning 92 Table of Contents communication channels to inform associates of their responsibilities, alert them to issues or changes that might affect their activities, and to enable an open flow of information up, down, and across our company. Robust risk management also requires management information to enable controls to work effectively and to support the analysis needed to set objectives and assess risk accurately. Our risk governance structure is designed to support solid and ongoing communication. Specific reports and communication infrastructure are defined within our individual risk category policies. Program Monitoring Program monitoring is critical to our overall risk management program. Program monitoring involves assessing the accuracy, sufficiency, and effectiveness of current objectives, risk assessments, controls, ownership, communication, and management support. The assessment of a risk program or activity can be qualitative or quantitative. We encourage the use of measurements and metrics where it is possible, recognizing that some risks or programs cannot be measured quantitatively. Where deficiencies are discovered, we seek to update the risk management program to resolve the deficiencies in a timely manner. Significant deficiencies are escalated to the appropriate risk executive or risk committee. Clear accountability is defined when resolving deficiencies so that the desired outcome is achieved. Risk management programs are monitored at every level from the overall Enterprise Risk Management Program to the individual risk management activities in each business area. Organization and Culture Our intent is to create and maintain an effective risk management organization and culture. A strong organization and culture promotes risk management as a key factor in making important business decisions and helps drive risk management activities deeper into the company. An effective risk management culture starts with a well-defined risk management philosophy. It requires established risk management objectives that align to business objectives and make targeted risk management activities part of ongoing business management activities. We believe we staff risk functions at the appropriate levels with qualified associates and effective tools that support risk management practices and activities. Senior management and the Board of Directors are ultimately accountable for promoting adherence to sound risk principles and tolerances. We seek to incent associates at all levels to perform according to corporate policies and risk tolerance and in conformity with applicable laws and regulations. Additionally, management establishes performance goals, plans, and incentives that are designed to promote financial performance within the confines of a sound risk management program and within defined risk tolerances. We have a corporate Code of Business Conduct and Ethics (the Code ) (available on the Corporate Governance page of our Web site at www.capitalone.com/about) under which each associate is obligated to behave with integrity in dealing with customers and business partners and to comply with applicable laws and regulations. We disclose any waivers to the Code on our Web site. We also have an associate performance management process that emphasizes achieving business results while ensuring integrity, compliance, and sound business management. Risk Appetite We have a defined risk appetite for each of our eight risk categories that is approved by the Board of Directors. Stated risk appetites define the parameters for taking and accepting risks and are used by management and the Board of Directors to make business decisions. For some risk categories (credit, liquidity, market), our risk appetite statements are translated into largely quantitative limits and guidelines. For other risk categories, our risk appetite is defined more qualitatively and is supported by indicative metrics where appropriate. We communicate risk appetite statements, metrics and limits to the appropriate levels in the organization and monitor adherence. 93 Table of Contents Primary Risk Categories Below we provide an overview of how we manage our eight primary risk categories. Following this section, we provide detailed information and metrics about three of our most significant risk exposures: credit, liquidity and market. Credit Risk Management The Chief Risk Officer, in conjunction with the Consumer and Commercial Chief Credit Officers, is responsible for establishing credit risk policies and procedures, including underwriting and hold guidelines and credit approval authority, and monitoring credit exposure and performance of our lending-related transactions. These responsibilities are fulfilled by the Chief Consumer Credit Officer and the Chief Commercial Credit Officer. Division Presidents are responsible for managing the credit risk within their division and maintaining processes to control credit risk and comply with credit policies and guidelines. In addition, the Chief Risk Officer establishes policies, delegates approval authority and monitors performance for non-loan credit exposure entered into with financial counterparties or through the purchase of credit sensitive securities in our investment portfolio. Our credit policies establish standards in five areas: customer selection, underwriting, monitoring, remediation, and portfolio management. The standards in each area provide a framework comprising specific objectives and control processes. These standards are supported by detailed policies and procedures for each component of the credit process. Starting with customer selection, our goal is to generally provide credit on terms that generate above hurdle returns. We use a number of quantitative and qualitative factors to manage credit risk, including setting credit risk limits and guidelines for each of our lines of business. We monitor performance and forecasts relative to these guidelines and report results and any required mitigating actions to the Credit Policy Committee and to the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board. Liquidity Risk Management The Chief Financial Officer is responsible for managing liquidity risk. We assess liquidity strength by evaluating several different balance sheet metrics under severe stress scenarios to ensure we can withstand significant funding degradation in both deposits and capital marketing funding sources. Management reports liquidity metrics to the Asset/Liability Management Committee monthly and to the Finance and Trust Oversight Committee of the Board of Directors no less than quarterly. Any policy breach in a liquidity limit will result in the activation of the Liquidity Contingency Funding Plan and is required to be reported to the Treasurer as soon as it is identified and to the Asset/Liability Management Committee within 48 hours. Detailed processes, requirements and controls are contained in our policies and supporting procedures. We continuously monitor market and economic conditions to evaluate emerging stress conditions with assessment and appropriate action plans in accordance with our Liquidity Contingency Plan. Market Risk Management The Chief Financial Officer is responsible for managing market risk. We manage market risk exposure centrally and establish quantitative limits to control our exposure. We define market risk as the risk that our earnings and/or economic value of equity may be adversely affected by changes in market conditions, including changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates, changes in credit spreads and price fluctuations and changes in value due to changes in market perception or the actual credit quality of issuers. Market risk is inherent in the financial instruments associated with our operations and activities, including loans, deposits, securities, short-term borrowings, long-term debt and derivatives. The market risk positions of our banking entities and our total company are calculated separately and in total and are reported in comparison to pre-established limits to the Asset/Liability Management Committee monthly and 94 Table of Contents to the Finance and Trust Oversight Committee of the Board no less than quarterly. Management is authorized to utilize financial instruments as outlined in our policy to actively manage market risk exposure. Detailed processes, requirements and controls are contained in our policies and supporting procedures. Compliance Risk Management The Chief Compliance Officer is responsible for establishing the compliance management program, for determining specific compliance requirements, and for monitoring performance. Division Presidents are responsible for building and maintaining business processes and controls that meet the requirements of the compliance program. We ensure compliance by maintaining an effective Compliance Management Program consisting of sound policies, systems, processes, and reports. The Compliance Management Program provides management with guidance, training, and monitoring to provide reasonable assurance of our compliance with internal and external compliance requirements. Additionally, management and the Corporate Compliance department jointly and separately conduct on-going monitoring and assess the state of compliance. The assessment provides the basis for performance reporting to management and the Board, allows business areas to determine if their compliance performance is acceptable, and confirms effective compliance controls are in place. Business areas embed compliance requirements and controls into their business policies, standards, processes and procedures. They regularly monitor and report on the efficacy of their compliance controls. Corporate Compliance, working jointly with the business, defines and validates a standard compliance monitoring and reporting methodology. Compliance results and trends are reported to management Risk Management Committee and the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board. Operational Risk Management The Chief Operational Risk Officer is responsible for the establishment of operational risk management policies and standards and for governance and monitoring of operational risk at a corporate level. Division Presidents are responsible for managing operational risk within their business areas. Business areas are accountable for the management of operational risk controls and mitigation of risk. The Operational Risk Management Program establishes requirements and control processes that assure certain consistent practices in the management of operational risk and provides transparency to the corporate operational risk profile. Operational risk practices are currently being aligned with Basel II AMA ( Advanced Measurement Approach ) requirements. The Operational Risk Management ( ORM ) function plays an active role in monitoring adherence to our operational risk policies and standards as well as in the validation of our operational risk levels, as expressed against our appetite. Key activities performed by ORM include the collection of operational breakdowns; the identification, analysis and escalation of risks and/or issues, and the regular reporting of risk levels to senior management and the Board. Legal Risk Management The General Counsel is responsible for managing legal risk by providing legal evaluation and guidance to the enterprise and business areas and by partnering with other risk-related functions such as Compliance and Audit. This evaluation and guidance is based on an assessment of the type and degree of legal risk associated with the internal business area practices and activities and of the controls the business has in place to mitigate legal risks. Legal risk is governed by and defined in our Legal Risk Policy. 95 Table of Contents Reputation Risk Management The General Counsel is responsible for managing our overall reputation risk. Reputation risks associated with daily interactions are managed by our business areas. Business area activities are controlled by the frameworks set forth in the Reputation Risk Management Policy and other risk management policies. Each business area determines how much risk it is willing to accept and when it is prudent to execute mitigation activities. From time to time, senior management conducts detailed assessments of our business practices and evaluates them in terms of their potential impact on Capital One reputation. The Reputation Risk Management Policy sets forth the obligation of each business area, with direction and guidance from the Reputation Risk Steward and his or her designee, to identify, assess and determine whether and how best to mitigate its reputation risk. The Reputation Risk Steward is responsible for reporting on the assessments of our aggregate reputation risk, as well as the state of our reputation with specific stakeholder groups, to the Chief Risk Officer, the Chief Executive Officer, the Risk Management Committee and the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board of Directors, as appropriate. Strategic Risk Management The Chief Executive Officer is responsible for our strategy. The Chief Executive Officer develops an overall corporate strategy and leads alignment of the entire organization with this strategy through definition of strategic imperatives and top-down communication. The Chief Executive Officer and other senior executives spend significant time throughout the entire company sharing our strategic imperatives to promote an understanding of our strategy and connect it to day-to-day associate activities to enable effective execution. Division Presidents are accountable for defining business strategy within the context of the overall corporate level strategy and strategic imperatives. Business strategies are integrated into the corporate strategy and are reviewed separately and together on an annual basis by the Chief Executive Officer and the Board of Directors. CREDIT RISK PROFILE Our loan portfolio accounts for the substantial majority of our credit risk exposure. These activities are also governed under our credit policy and are subject to independent review and approval. Below we provide information about our primary loan products, the composition of our loan portfolio, key concentrations and credit performance metrics. We also engage in certain non-lending activities that may give rise to credit and counterparty settlement risk, including the purchase of securities for our investment securities portfolio, entering into derivative transactions to manage our market risk exposure and to accommodate customers, foreign exchange transactions and providing deposit overdraft services. We provide additional information on credit risk related to our investment securities portfolio under Consolidated Balance Sheet Analysis Investment Securities and credit risk related to derivative transactions in Note 11 Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities. Primary Loan Products We provide a variety of lending products. Our primary products include credit cards, auto loans, home loans and commercial loans. Credit cards : We market a range of credit card products across the credit spectrum and through a variety of channels. Our credit cards generally have variable interest rates. Credit card accounts are underwritten using an automated underwriting system based on predictive models that we have developed. The underwriting criteria, which are customized for individual products and marketing programs, are established based on an analysis of the net present value of expected revenues, expenses and losses, subject to a further analysis using a variety of stress conditions. Underwriting decisions are generally based on credit bureau information, including payment history, debt burden and credit scores, such as FICO, and on other factors, such as applicant income. We maintain a credit card securitization program and selectively sell charged-off 96 Table of Contents credit card loans. Prior to February 1, 2013, we had not securitized any credit card loans since 2009. On February 1, 2013, we executed our first credit card securitization transaction in over three and a half years by issuing $750 million of 3-year, AAA rated, fixed-rate notes under our credit card securitization trust. Auto loans : We market a range of auto loan products across the credit spectrum. Customers are acquired through a network of auto dealers and direct marketing. Our auto loans generally have fixed interest rates and loan terms of 72 months or less. Loan size limits are customized by program and subject to a current maximum of $75,000. Similar to credit card accounts, the underwriting criteria are customized for individual products and marketing programs and based on analysis of net present value of expected revenues, expenses and losses, subject to maintaining resilience under a variety of stress conditions. Underwriting decisions are generally based on an applicant income, estimated debt-to-income ratio, and credit bureau information, along with collateral characteristics such as loan-to-value ratio. We generally retain all of our auto loans, though we have securitized auto loans and sold charged-off auto loans in the past and may do so in the future. Home loans: Most of the existing home loans in our loan portfolio were originated by banks we acquired. The underwriting standards for these loans were less restrictive than our current underwriting standards. Currently, we originate residential mortgage and home equity loans through our branches, direct marketing, and dedicated home loan officers. Our home loan products include conforming and non-conforming fixed rate and adjustable rate mortgage loans, as well as first and second lien home equity loans and lines of credit. Our underwriting standards for conforming loans are designed to meet the underwriting standards required by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or Federal Housing Administration ( FHA )/ Veterans Affairs ( VA ) (the agencies ) at a minimum, and we sell most of our conforming loans to the agencies. We generally retain non-conforming mortgages and home equity loans and lines of credit. Our underwriting policy limits for these loans include: (1) a maximum loan-to-value ratio of 80% for loans without mortgage insurance; (2) a maximum loan-to-value ratio of 95% for loans with mortgage insurance or for home equity products; (3) a maximum debt-to-income ratio of 50%; and (4) a maximum loan amount of $3.0 million. Our underwriting procedures are intended to verify the income of applicants and obtain appraisals to determine home values. We may, in limited instances, use automated valuation models to determine home values. Commercial loans. We offer a range of commercial lending products, including loans secured by commercial real estate and loans to middle market industrial and service companies. Our commercial loans may have a fixed or variable interest rate; however, the majority of our commercial loans have variable rates. Our underwriting standards require an analysis of the borrower financial condition and prospects, as well as an assessment of the industry in which the borrower operates. Where relevant, we evaluate and appraise underlying collateral and guarantees. We maintain underwriting guidelines and limits for major types of borrowers and loan products that specify, where applicable, guidelines for debt service coverage, leverage, loan-to-value ratio and standard covenants and conditions. We assign a risk rating and establish a monitoring schedule for loans based on the risk profile of the borrower, industry segment, source of repayment, the underlying collateral and guarantees (if any) and current market conditions. Although we generally retain commercial loans, we may syndicate large positions for risk mitigation purposes. In addition, we have sold impaired commercial loans in the past and may do so in the future. Loan Portfolio Composition Total loans that we manage consist of held-for-investment loans recorded on our consolidated balance sheets and loans held in our securitization trusts. Loans underlying our securitization trusts are reported on our consolidated balance sheets in restricted loans for securitization investors. Table 15 presents the composition of our total loan portfolio, by business segment, as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 15 also displays acquired loans accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected, which consists of a limited portion of the credit card loans acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and the substantial majority of consumer and commercial loans acquired in the ING Direct and Chevy Chase Bank acquisitions. See the discussion of Loans Acquired below in this section for further information. 97 Table of Contents Table 15: Loan Portfolio Composition December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 Loans Acquired Loans (1) Total % of Total Loans Acquired Loans (1) Total % of Total Credit Card business: Credit card loans: Domestic credit card loans $ 82,058 $ 270 $ 82,328 40.0 % $ 54,682 $ $ 54,682 40.3 % International credit card loans 8,614 8,614 4.2 8,466 8,466 6.2 Total credit card loans 90,672 270 90,942 44.2 63,148 63,148 46.5 Installment loans: Domestic installment loans 795 18 813 0.4 1,927 1,927 1.4 Total credit card 91,467 288 91,755 44.6 65,075 65,075 47.9 Consumer Banking business: Auto 27,106 17 27,123 13.2 21,732 47 21,779 16.0 Home loan 7,697 36,403 44,100 21.4 6,321 4,112 10,433 7.7 Other retail 3,870 34 3,904 1.9 4,058 45 4,103 3.0 Total consumer banking 38,673 36,454 75,127 36.5 32,111 4,204 36,315 26.7 Commercial Banking business: (2) Commercial and multifamily real estate 17,605 127 17,732 8.6 15,573 163 15,736 11.6 Commercial and industrial 19,660 232 19,892 9.7 16,770 318 17,088 12.6 Total commercial lending 37,265 359 37,624 18.3 32,343 481 32,824 24.2 Small-ticket commercial real estate 1,196 1,196 0.5 1,503 1,503 1.1 Total commercial banking 38,461 359 38,820 18.8 33,846 481 34,327 25.3 Other: Other loans 154 33 187 0.1 175 175 0.1 Total loans held for investment (3) $ 168,755 $ 37,134 $ 205,889 100.0 % $ 131,207 $ 4,685 $ 135,892 100.0 % (1) Consists of acquired loans accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 5 Loans for additional information. (2) Includes construction loans and land development loans totaling $2.1 billion and $2.2 billion as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. (3 ) We had a net unamortized premium on purchased loans of $461 million and a net unamortized discount of $4 million as of December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, respectively. Credit Card accounted for $91.8 billion, or 45%, of our total loan portfolio as of December 31, 2012, compared with $65.1 billion, or 48% as of December 31, 2011. We market our credit card products on a national basis throughout the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. Because of the diversity of our credit card products and national marketing approach, no single geographic concentration exists within the credit card portfolio. Consumer Banking accounted for $75.1 billion, or 37%, of our loan portfolio as of December 31, 2012, compared with $36.3 billion, or 27%, of our loan portfolio as of December 31, 2011. The auto portfolio is originated primarily on a national basis, with additional originations through our retail branch network. The home loan portfolio is concentrated in New York, California and Louisiana which reflects the characteristics of the legacy Hibernia, North Fork and Chevy Chase Bank portfolios that comprise the majority of our home loans. Retail banking includes small business loans and other consumer lending products originated through our branch network. 98 Table of Contents Commercial Banking represented $38.8 billion, or 19%, of our loan portfolio as of December 31, 2012, compared with $34.3 billion, or 25%, as of December 31, 2011. We operate our Commercial Banking business primarily in geographic regions where we maintain retail bank branches. Accordingly, the portfolio is concentrated in New York, Louisiana and Texas, which represent our largest retail banking markets. Our small-ticket commercial real estate portfolio, which was originated on a national basis through a broker network, is in a run-off mode. We provide additional information on the geographic concentration, by loan category, of our loan portfolio in Note 5 Loans. Loans Acquired As noted above, our portfolio of loans held for investment consists of loans acquired in the Chevy Chase Bank, ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions. These loans were recorded at fair value as of the date of each acquisition. We elect to account for all purchased loans using the guidance for accounting for purchased credit-impaired loans, which is based on expected cash flows, unless specifically scoped out of the guidance. Loans Acquired and Accounted for Based on Expected Cash Flows We use the term acquired loans to refer to a limited portion of the credit card loans acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and the substantial majority of consumer and commercial loans acquired in the ING Direct and Chevy Chase Bank acquisitions, which are accounted for based on expected cash flows to be collected. Acquired loans accounted for based on expected cash flows to be collected increased to $37.1 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $4.7 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase was largely due to acquired loans from the ING Direct acquisition. We regularly update our estimate of the amount of expected principal and interest to be collected from these loans and evaluate the results on an aggregated pool basis for loans with common risk characteristics. Probable decreases in expected loan principal cash flows would trigger the recognition of impairment through our provision for credit losses. Probable and significant increases in expected cash flows would first reverse any previously recorded allowance for loan and lease losses established subsequent to acquisition, with any remaining increase in expected cash flows recognized prospectively in interest income over the remaining estimated life of the underlying loans. We increased the allowance and recorded a provision for credit losses of $31 million in 2012 related to certain pools of acquired loans. The cumulative impairment recognized on acquired loans totaled $57 million and $26 million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The credit performance of the remaining pools has generally been in line with our expectations, and, in some cases, more favorable than expected, which has resulted in the reclassification of amounts from the nonaccretable difference to the accretable yield. Loans Acquired and Accounted for Based on Contractual Cash Flows Of the loans acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition, there were loans of $26.2 billion designated as held for investment that had existing revolving privileges at acquisition and were therefore excluded from the accounting guidance applied to the acquired loans described in the paragraphs above. These loans were recorded at a fair value of $26.9 billion, resulting in a net premium of $705 million at acquisition. Fair value was determined by discounting all expected cash flows (contractual principal, interest, finance charges and fees of $33.3 billion less those amounts not expected to be collected of $3.0 billion) at a market discount rate. Under applicable accounting guidance, we are required to amortize the net premium of $705 million over the contractual principal amount as an adjustment to interest income over the remaining life of the loans. Given the guidance applicable to acquired revolving loans, it is necessary to record an allowance through the provision for 99 Table of Contents credit losses to properly recognize an estimate of incurred losses on the existing principal balances, which represents a portion of the total amounts not expected to be collected described above. In 2012, we recorded a provision for credit losses of $1.2 billion to establish an initial allowance primarily related to these loans. The allowance was calculated using the same methodology utilized for determining the allowance for our existing credit card portfolio. The provision for credit losses of $1.2 billion related to these loans is included in the total provision for credit losses of $4.4 billion recorded in 2012. Excluded from the amounts above are revolving loans acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition with a fair value of $471 million that we designated as held for sale at acquisition. We closed on the sale of these receivables early in the third quarter of 2012. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Loans for additional information on our accounting for loans, including purchased loans. See Note 5 Loans and Note 6 Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses for additional information on the credit quality of our loan portfolio. Loan Maturity Profile Table 16 presents the maturities of loans in our held-for-investment portfolio as of December 31, 2012. Table 16: Loan Maturity Schedule December 31, 2012 (Dollars in millions) Due Up to 1 Year > 1 Year to 5 Years > 5 Years Total Fixed rate: Credit card (1) (2) $ 3,357 $ 16,699 $ 45 $ 20,101 Consumer 762 22,249 12,927 35,938 Commercial 1,288 5,880 5,887 13,055 Other 35 35 Total fixed-rate loans 5,407 44,828 18,894 69,129 Variable rate: Credit card (1) 71,639 15 71,654 Consumer 7,176 833 31,180 39,189 Commercial 23,350 2,265 150 25,765 Other 128 15 9 152 Total variable-rate loans 102,293 3,128 31,339 136,760 Total loans $ 107,700 $ 47,956 $ 50,233 $ 205,889 (1) Due to the revolving nature of credit card loans, we report all variable-rate credit card loans as due in one year or less. We report fixed-rate credit card loans with introductory rates that expire after a certain period of time as due in one year or less. We assume that our remaining fixed-rate credit card loans will mature within one to three years. (2) Includes installment loans of $813 million as of December 31, 2012. Credit Risk Measurement We closely monitor economic conditions and loan performance trends to assess and manage our exposure to credit risk. Key metrics we track in evaluating the credit quality of our loan portfolio include delinquency and nonperforming asset rates, as well as charge-off rates and our internal risk ratings of larger balance, commercial loans. Trends in delinquency rates are a primary indicator of credit risk within our consumer loan portfolios, as changes in delinquency rate provide an early warning of changes in credit losses. The primary indicator of credit risk in our commercial loan portfolios is risk ratings. Because we generally classify loans that have been 100 Table of Contents delinquent for an extended period of time and other loans with significant risk of loss as nonperforming, the level of nonperforming assets represents another indicator of the potential for future credit losses. In addition to delinquency rates, the geographic distribution of our loans provides insight as to the credit quality of the portfolio based on regional economic conditions. We use borrower credit scores in underwriting for most consumer loans. We do not use credit scores as a primary indicator of credit quality, because product differences, loan structure, and other factors drive large differences in credit quality for a given credit score, and because a borrower credit score tends to be a lagging indicator of credit quality. We continuously adjust our credit line management of credit lines and collection strategies based on customer behavior and risk profile changes. As noted above, our Credit Card business accounted for $91.8 billion, or 45%, of our total loan portfolio as of December 31, 2012, with Domestic Card accounting for $83.1 billion, or 40%, of our total loan portfolio as of December 31, 2012. Based on our most recent data, we estimate that approximately one-third of our Domestic Card portfolio had credit scores less than 660 or no score, based on loan balances, as of December 31, 2012, relatively consistent with the proportion of the Domestic Card portfolio with credit scores below 660 or no score as of December 31, 2011. For loans related to the 2012 U.S. card acquisition and certain other partnerships, data is obtained on a lagged basis. We present information in the section below on the credit performance of our loan portfolio, including the key metrics we use in tracking changes in the credit quality of our loan portfolio. Loans acquired as part of the CCB, ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions are included in the denominator used in calculating the credit quality metrics presented below. Because some of these loans are accounted for based on expected cash flows to be collected, which takes into consideration future credit losses expected to be incurred, there are no charge-offs or an allowance associated with these loans unless the estimated cash flows expected to be collected decrease subsequent to acquisition. In addition, these loans are not classified as delinquent or nonperforming even though the customer may be contractually past due because we expect that we will fully collect the carrying value of these loans. The accounting and classification of these loans may significantly alter some of our reported credit quality metrics. We therefore supplement certain reported credit quality metrics with metrics adjusted to exclude the impact of these acquired loans. Delinquency Rates We consider the entire balance of an account to be delinquent if the minimum required payment is not received by the first statement cycle date equal to or following the due date specified on the customer billing statement. Table 17 compares 30+ day performing and total 30+ day delinquency rates, by loan category, as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 17 also presents these metrics adjusted to exclude from the denominator acquired loans accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected over the life of the loans. Our 30+ day delinquency metrics include all held-for-investment loans that are 30 or more days past due, whereas our 30+ day performing delinquency metrics include loans that are 30 or more days past due and that are also currently classified as performing and accruing interest. The 30+ day delinquency and 30+ day performing delinquency metrics are generally the same for credit card loans, as we continue to classify the substantial majority of credit card loans as performing until the account is charged-off, typically when the account is 180 days past due. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Loans for information on our policies for classifying loans as nonperforming for each of our loan categories. 101 Table of Contents Table 17: 30+ Day Delinquencies (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2012 December 31, 2011 30+ Day Performing 30+ Day Total 30+ Day Performing 30+ Day Total Amount Rate (1) Adjusted Rate (2) Amount Rate (1) Adjusted Rate (2) Amount Rate (1) Adjusted Rate (2) Amount Rate (1) Adjusted Rate (2) Credit Card business: Domestic credit card and installment loans $ 3,001 3.61 % 3.62 % $ 3,001 3.61 % 3.62 % $ 2,073 3.66 % 3.66 % $ 2,073 3.66 % 3.66 % International credit card 308 3.58 3.58 387 4.49 4.49 438 5.18 5.18 438 5.18 5.17 Total credit card 3,309 3.61 3.62 3,388 3.69 3.70 2,511 3.86 3.86 2,511 3.86 3.86 Consumer Banking business: Automobile 1,900 7.00 7.01 2,049 7.55 7.56 1,498 6.88 6.90 1,604 7.36 7.38 Home loan 59 0.13 0.77 380 0.86 4.94 93 0.89 1.47 478 4.58 7.56 Retail banking 30 0.76 0.77 81 2.07 2.09 34 0.83 0.84 94 2.29 2.32 Total consumer banking 1,989 2.65 5.14 2,510 3.34 6.49 1,625 4.47 5.06 2,176 5.99 6.78 Commercial Banking business: Commercial and multifamily real estate 140 0.79 0.79 248 1.40 1.41 217 1.38 1.40 342 2.17 2.20 Commercial and industrial 73 0.37 0.37 135 0.68 0.69 78 0.45 0.46 152 0.89 0.91 Total commercial lending 213 0.57 0.57 383 1.02 1.03 295 0.91 0.91 494 1.50 1.53 Small-ticket commercial real estate 33 2.74 2.74 43 3.60 3.60 104 6.94 6.94 141 9.38 9.38 Total commercial banking 246 0.63 0.64 426 1.10 1.11 399 1.16 1.18 635 1.85 1.88 Other: Other loans 11 5.72 6.95 36 19.25 23.38 17 9.65 9.65 46 26.29 26.29 Total $ 5,555 2.70 % 3.29 % $ 6,360 3.09 % 3.77 % $ 4,552 3.35 % 3.47 % $ 5,368 3.95 % 4.09 % (1) Calculated by loan category by dividing 30+ day delinquent loans as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category, including acquired loans as applicable. (2) Calculated by excluding acquired loans accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected from the denominator. 102 Table of Contents Table 18 presents an aging of 30+ day delinquent loans included in the above table. Table 18: Aging and Geography of 30+ Day Delinquent Loans December 31, 2012 2011 (Dollars in millions) Amount % of Total Loans (1) Amount % of Total Loans (1) Total loan portfolio $ 205,889 100.0 % $ 135,892 100.00 % Delinquency status: 30 59 days $ 2,664 1.29 % $ 2,306 1.70 % 60 89 days 1,440 0.70 1,092 0.80 90 + days 2,256 1.10 1,970 1.45 Total $ 6,360 3.09 % $ 5,368 3.95 % Geographic region: Domestic $ 6,052 2.94 % $ 4,930 3.63 % International 308 0.15 438 0.32 Total $ 6,360 3.09 % $ 5,368 3.95 % (1) Calculated by dividing loans in each delinquency status category or geographic region as of the end of the period by the total held-for-investment loan portfolio, including acquired loans. Table 19 summarizes loans that were 90 days or more past due as to interest or principal and still accruing interest as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. These loans consist primarily of credit card accounts between 90 days and 179 days past due. As permitted by regulatory guidance issued by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council ( FFIEC ), we generally continue to accrue interest on domestic credit card loans through the date of charge-off, which is typically in the period the account becomes 180 days past due. While domestic credit card loans typically remain on accrual status until the loan is charged-off, we establish a reserve for finance charges and fees billed but not expected to be collected and exclude this amount from revenue. Table 19: 90+ Days Delinquent Loans Accruing Interest (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Amount % of Total Loans Amount % of Total Loans Amount % of Total Loans Loan category: (1) Credit card (2) $ 1,510 1.65 % $ 1,196 1.84 % $ 1,379 2.25 % Consumer 1 0.00 5 0.01 5 0.01 Commercial 16 0.04 41 0.12 14 0.05 Total $ 1,527 0.74 % $ 1,242 0.91 % $ 1,398 1.11 % Geographic region: (3) Domestic $ 1,427 0.69 % $ 1,047 0.77 % $ 1,195 0.95 % International 100 0.05 195 0.14 203 0.16 Total $ 1,527 0.74 % $ 1,242 0.91 % $ 1,398 1.11 % (1) Delinquency rates are calculated by loan category by dividing 90+ day delinquent loans accruing interest as of the end of the period by period-end loans held for investment for the specified loan category, including acquired loans as applicable. (2) Includes credit card loans that continue to accrue finance charges and fees until charged-off, which is typically at 180 days past due. The amounts reported for credit card loans are net of billed finance charges and fees that we do not expect to collect. The estimated uncollectible portion of billed finance charges and fees excluded from revenue totaled $937 million, $371 million and $950 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The reserve for uncollectible billed finance charges and fees totaled $307 million, $74 million and $211 million as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. (3) Calculated by dividing loans in each geographic region as of the end of the period by the total loan portfolio. 103 Table of Contents Nonperforming Assets Nonperforming assets consist of nonperforming loans, foreclosed property and repossessed assets. Nonperforming loans generally include loans that have been placed on nonaccrual status and certain restructured loans whose contractual terms have been restructured in a manner that grants a concession to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty. We do not report loans accounted for under the fair value option and loans held for sale as nonperforming. In addition, we separately track and report acquired loans accounted for based on expected cash flows and disclose our delinquency and nonperforming loan rates with and without these acquired loans. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Loans for information on our policies for classifying loans as nonperforming for each of our loan categories. Table 20 presents comparative information on nonperforming loans, by loan category, as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, and the ratio of nonperforming loans to our total loans. Nonperforming loans held for sale are excluded from nonperforming loans, as they are recorded at lower of cost or fair value. Table 20: Nonperforming Loans and Other Nonperforming Assets (1)(2) (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2012 (3) 2011 Amount % of Total HFI Loans Amount % of Total HFI Loans Nonperforming loans held for investment: Credit card business: International credit card $ 100 1.16 % $ % Total credit card 100 0.11 Consumer Banking business: Auto 149 0.55 106 0.48 Home loan 422 0.96 456 4.37 Retail banking 71 1.82 90 2.18 Total consumer banking 642 0.85 652 1.79 Commercial Banking business: Commercial and multifamily real estate 137 0.77 207 1.32 Commercial and industrial 133 0.67 125 0.73 Total commercial lending 270 0.72 332 1.01 Small-ticket commercial real estate 12 0.97 40 2.63 Total commercial banking 282 0.73 372 1.08 Other: Other loans 30 15.85 35 20.42 Total nonperforming loans held for investment (4) $ 1,054 0.51 % $ 1,059 0.78 % Other nonperforming assets: Foreclosed property (5) $ 204 0.10 % $ 169 0.13 % Repossessed assets 22 0.01 20 0.01 Total other nonperforming assets 226 0.11 189 0.14 Total nonperforming assets $ 1,280 0.62 % $ 1,248 0.92 % (1) The ratio of nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans held for investment is calculated based on the nonperforming loans in each loan category divided by the total outstanding unpaid principal balance of loans held for investment in each loan category. The denominator used in calculating the nonperforming asset ratios consists of total loans held for investment and other nonperforming assets. 104 Table of Contents (2) The nonperforming loan ratio, excluding the impact of acquired loans from the denominator, for home loan, retail banking, total consumer banking, commercial and multifamily real estate, commercial and industrial, total commercial banking and total nonperforming loans held for investment was 5.48%, 1.83%, 1.66%, 0.78%, 0.68%, 0.73% and 0.62%, respectively, as of December 31, 2012, compared with 7.22%, 2.21%, 2.03%, 1.33%, 0.75%, 1.10% and 0.81%, respectively, as of December 31, 2011. The nonperforming asset ratio, excluding acquired loans, was 0.76% and 0.95% as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. (3) We recognized interest income for loans classified as nonperforming of $32 million and $31 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. Interest income foregone related to nonperforming loans was $41 million and $44 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. Foregone interest income represents the amount of interest income that would have been recorded during the period for nonperforming loans as of the end of the period had the loans performed according to their contractual terms. (4) Nonperforming loans as a percentage of loans held for investment, excluding credit card loans from the denominator, was 0.92% and 1.50% as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. (5) Includes foreclosed properties related to acquired loans of $167 million and $86 million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Nonperforming loans included troubled debt restructurings ( TDRs ) of $375 million and $170 million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. While the amount of nonperforming loans of $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2012 was unchanged from December 31, 2011, the nonperforming loan ratio decreased to 0.51% as of December 31, 2012, from 0.78% as of December 31, 2011. The decrease was primarily attributable to the addition of the ING Direct acquired loans accounted for based on expected cash flows, as well as the improvement in the credit quality of our commercial banking loans. Net Charge-Offs Net charge-offs consist of the unpaid principal balance of loans held for investment that we determine are uncollectible, net of recovered amounts. We exclude accrued and unpaid finance charges and fees and fraud losses from charge-offs. Charge-offs are recorded as a reduction to the allowance for loan and lease losses and subsequent recoveries of previously charged off amounts are credited to the allowance for loan and lease losses. Costs incurred to recover charged-off loans are recorded as collection expense and included in our consolidated statements of income as a component of other non-interest expense. Our charge-off time frame for loans varies based on the loan type. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Loans for information on our charge-off policy for each of our loan categories. Table 21 presents our net charge-off amounts and rates, by business segment, for 2012, 2011 and 2010. We provide information on charge-off amounts by loan category below in Table 22. Table 21: Net Charge-Offs (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Amount Rate (1) Adjusted Rate (2) Amount Rate (1) Adjusted Rate (2) Amount Rate (1) Adjusted Rate (2) Credit card $ 2,944 3.68 % 3.69 % $ 3,056 4.92 % 4.92 % $ 5,505 8.79 % 8.79 % Consumer banking 531 0.74 1.45 484 1.39 1.59 655 1.82 2.17 Commercial banking 42 0.12 0.12 177 0.57 0.58 391 1.31 1.34 Other 38 24.14 24.57 54 25.96 25.96 106 37.80 37.80 Total $ 3,555 1.89 % 2.34 % $ 3,771 2.94 % 3.06 % $ 6,657 5.18 % 5.45 % Average loans held for investment $ 187,915 $ 128,424 $ 128,622 Average loans held for investment (excluding acquired loans) (3) 151,668 123,416 122,228 (1) Calculated for each loan category by dividing net charge-offs for the period by average loans held for investment during the period. (2) Calculated by excluding acquired loans accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected from the denominator. 105 Table of Contents (3) The carrying value of acquired loans accounted for based on estimated expected cash flows to be collected was $37.1 billion, $4.7 billion and $5.6 billion as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. In the third quarter of 2012, the OCC issued an update to the Bank Accounting Advisory Series requiring the write-down to collateral value of performing consumer loans that have been restructured in bankruptcy. We recognized additional charge-offs of $25 million in the third quarter of 2012, which are reflected in Table 21 above, pursuant to the OCC guidance. Loan Modifications and Restructurings As part of our customer retention efforts, we may modify loans for certain borrowers who have demonstrated performance under the previous terms. As part of our loss mitigation efforts, we may make loan modifications to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty that are intended to minimize our economic loss and avoid the need for foreclosure or repossession of collateral. We may provide short-term (three to twelve months) or long-term (greater than twelve months) modifications to improve the long-term collectability of the loan. Our most common types of modifications include a reduction in the borrower initial monthly or quarterly principal and interest payment through an extension of the loan term, a reduction in the interest rate, or a combination of both. These modifications may result in our receiving the full amount due, or certain installments due, under the loan over a period of time that is longer than the period of time originally provided for under the terms of the loan. In some cases, we may curtail the amount of principal owed by the borrower. Loan modifications in which a concession has been granted to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty are accounted for and reported as TDRs. We also classify loan modifications that involve a trial period as TDRs. Table 22 presents the loan balances as of December 31, 2012 and 2011 of loan modifications made as part of our loss mitigation efforts, all of which are considered to be TDRs. Table 22 excludes loan modifications that do not meet the definition of a TDR and acquired loans accounted for based on expected cash flows, which we track and report separately. Table 22: Loan Modifications and Restructurings December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 Modified and restructured loans: Credit card (1) $ 873 $ 898 Auto 328 58 Home loan 145 104 Retail banking 65 80 Commercial banking 383 426 Total $ 1,794 $ 1,566 Status of modified and restructured loans: Performing $ 1,419 $ 1,396 Nonperforming 375 170 Total $ 1,794 $ 1,566 (1) Amount reported reflects the total outstanding customer balance, which consists of unpaid principal balance, accrued interest and fees. The outstanding balance of loan modifications made to assist borrowers experiencing financial difficulties increased to $1.8 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2011. Of these modifications, approximately $375 million, or 21%, were classified as nonperforming as of December 31, 2012, compared with $170 million, or 11%, as of December 31, 2011. 106 Table of Contents Credit card loan modifications have accounted for the majority of our TDR loan modifications, representing $873 million, or 49%, of the outstanding balance of total TDR loans as of December 31, 2012, and $898 million, or 57%, of the outstanding balance of total TDR loans as of December 31, 2011. The vast majority of our credit card TDR loan modifications involve a reduction in the interest rate on the account and placing the customer on a fixed payment plan not exceeding 60 months. In some cases, the interest rate on a credit card account is automatically increased due to non-payment, late payment or similar events. We determine the effective interest rate for purposes of measuring impairment on modified loans that involve a reduction and are considered to be a TDR based on the interest rate in effect immediately prior to the loan entering the modification program. In all cases, we cancel the customer available line of credit on the credit card. If the cardholder does not comply with the modified payment terms, then the credit card loan agreement may revert to its original payment terms, with the amount of any loan outstanding reflected in the appropriate delinquency category. The loan amount may then be charged-off in accordance with our standard charge-off policy. Home loan modifications represented $145 million, or 8%, of the outstanding balance of total modified loans as of December 31, 2012, compared with $104 million, or 7%, of the outstanding balance of total modified loans as of December 31, 2011. The majority of our modified home loans involve a combination of an interest rate reduction, term extension or principal forbearance. Retail banking loan modifications represented $65 million, or 4%, of the outstanding balance of total modified loans as of December 31, 2012 compared with $80 million, or 5%, of the outstanding balance of total loans as of December 31, 2011. Commercial loan modifications represented $383 million, or 21%, of the outstanding balance of total modified loans as of December 31, 2012, compared with $426 million, or 27%, of the outstanding balance of total modified loans as of December 31, 2011. The vast majority of modified commercial loans include a reduction in interest rate or a term extension. We provide additional information on modified loans accounted for as TDRs, including the performance of those loans subsequent to modification, in Note 5 Loans. Impaired Loans A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due from the borrower in accordance with the original contractual terms of the loan. Loans defined as individually impaired, based on applicable accounting guidance, include larger balance commercial nonperforming loans and TDR loans. We do not report nonperforming consumer loans that have not been modified in a TDR as individually impaired, as we collectively evaluate these smaller-balance homogenous loans for impairment in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. Loans held for sale are also not reported as impaired, as these loans are recorded at lower of cost or fair value. Impaired loans also exclude acquired loans accounted for based on expected cash flows because this accounting methodology takes into consideration future credit losses expected to be incurred, as discussed above under Item 6. Selected Financial Data. Impaired loans, including TDRs, totaled $2.0 billion as of December 31, 2012, compared with $1.8 billion as of December 31, 2011. TDRs accounted for $1.8 billion and $1.6 billion of impaired loans as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. We provide additional information on our impaired loans, including the allowance established for these loans, in Note 5 Loans and Note 6 Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses. 107 Table of Contents Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses Our allowance for loan and lease losses represents management best estimate of incurred loan and lease losses inherent in our held-for-investment portfolio as of each balance sheet date. We do not maintain an allowance for held-for-sale loans or acquired loans that are performing in accordance with or better than our expectations as of the date of acquisition, as the fair values of these loans already reflect a credit component. The allowance for loan and lease losses is increased through the provision for credit losses and reduced by net charge-offs. The provision for credit losses, which is charged to earnings, reflects loan and lease losses we believe have been incurred and will eventually be reflected over time in our charge-offs. Charge-offs of uncollectible amounts are deducted from the allowance and subsequent recoveries are added. Table 23, which displays changes in our allowance for loan and lease losses for 2012, 2011 and 2010, details, by loan type, the provision for credit losses recognized in our consolidated statements of income each period and the charge-offs recorded against our allowance for loan and lease losses. 108 Table of Contents Table 23: Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses Activity December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Balance at beginning of period, as reported $ 4,250 $ 5,628 $ 4,127 Impact from January 1, 2010 adoption of new consolidation accounting standards (1) 4,317 Balance at beginning of period, as adjusted 4,250 5,628 8,444 Provision for credit losses (2) (3) 4,446 2,401 3,895 Charge-offs: Credit Card business: (3) Domestic credit card and installment loans (3,507 ) (3,558 ) (6,020 ) International credit card (652 ) (752 ) (761 ) Total credit card (4,159 ) (4,310 ) (6,781 ) Consumer Banking business: Auto (631 ) (529 ) (672 ) Home loan (77 ) (104 ) (97 ) Retail banking (89 ) (99 ) (129 ) Total consumer banking (797 ) (732 ) (898 ) Commercial Banking business: Commercial and multifamily real estate (23 ) (76 ) (208 ) Commercial and industrial (32 ) (61 ) (137 ) Total commercial lending (55 ) (137 ) (345 ) Small-ticket commercial real estate (39 ) (77 ) (100 ) Total commercial banking (94 ) (214 ) (445 ) Other loans (43 ) (59 ) (114 ) Total charge-offs (5,093 ) (5,315 ) (8,238 ) Recoveries: Credit Card business: Domestic credit card and installment loans 975 1,036 1,113 International credit card 240 218 169 Total credit card 1,215 1,254 1,282 Consumer Banking business: Auto 217 195 215 Home loan 25 27 4 Retail banking 24 26 24 Total consumer banking 266 248 243 Commercial Banking business: Commercial and multifamily real estate 18 12 20 Commercial and industrial 25 20 32 Total commercial lending 43 32 52 Small-ticket commercial real estate 9 5 2 Total commercial banking 52 37 54 Other loans 5 5 8 Total recoveries 1,538 1,544 1,587 Net charge-offs (3,555 ) (3,771 ) (6,651 ) Impact loan sales and other changes (3) 15 (8 ) (60 ) (4) Balance at end of period (3) $ 5,156 $ 4,250 $ 5,628 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of loans held for investment 2.50 % 3.13 % 4.47 % 109 Table of Contents (1) Includes an adjustment of $53 million made in the second quarter of 2010 for the impact as of January 1, 2010 of impairment on consolidated loans accounted for as TDRs. (2) The total provision for credit losses reported in our consolidated statements of income of $4.4 billion, $2.4 billion and $3.9 billion in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, consists of a provision for loan and lease losses and a provision for unfunded lending commitments. The provision for credit losses reported in the above table relates only to the provision for loan and lease losses. It does not include the negative provision for unfunded lending commitments of $35 million in 2012 and the provision for unfunded lending commitments of $12 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. (3) Includes foreign translation adjustments of $15 million and $8 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. (4) Includes a reduction in our allowance for loan and lease losses of $73 million in 2010 attributable to the sale of certain interest-only option-adjustable rate mortgage ( option-ARM ) bonds and the deconsolidation of securitization trusts related to CCB. Table 24 presents an allocation of our allowance for loan and lease losses by loan category as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 24: Allocation of the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses December 31, 2012 2011 (Dollars in millions) Amount % of Total HFI Loans (1) Amount % of Total HFI Loans (1) Credit Card business: Domestic credit card and installment loans $ 3,526 4.24 % $ 2,375 4.20 % International credit card 453 5.26 472 5.58 Total credit card 3,979 4.34 2,847 4.37 Consumer Banking business: Auto 486 1.79 391 1.80 Home loan 113 0.26 98 0.94 Retail banking 112 2.87 163 3.97 Total consumer banking 711 0.95 652 1.80 Commercial Banking business: Commercial and multifamily real estate 239 1.35 415 2.64 Commercial and industrial 116 0.58 199 1.17 Total commercial lending 355 0.94 614 1.87 Small-ticket commercial real estate 78 6.52 101 6.75 Total commercial banking 433 1.12 715 2.08 Other loans 33 17.65 36 20.57 Total $ 5,156 2.50 % $ 4,250 3.13 % Total allowance coverage ratios: Period-end loans $ 205,889 2.50 % $ 135,892 3.13 % Period-end loans (excluding acquired loans) 168,755 3.02 131,207 3.24 Nonperforming loans (2) 1,054 489.18 1,059 401.32 Allowance coverage ratios by loan category: Credit card (30 + day delinquent loans) $ 3,388 117.44 % $ 2,511 113.38 % Consumer banking (30 + day delinquent loans) 2,510 28.33 2,176 29.96 Commercial banking (nonperforming loans) 282 153.55 372 192.20 (1) Calculated based on the allowance for loan and lease losses attributable to each loan category divided by the outstanding balance of loans within the specified loan category. (2) As permitted by regulatory guidance issued by the FFIEC, our policy is generally not to classify domestic credit card loans as nonperforming. We generally accrue interest on domestic credit card loans through the date of charge-off, which is typically in the period that the loan becomes 180 days past due. The allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of nonperforming loans, excluding the allowance related to our credit card loans, was 111.67% as of December 31, 2012 and 132.48% as of December 31, 2011. 110 Table of Contents We increased our allowance by $906 million in 2012 to $5.2 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase was primarily driven by the establishment of an initial allowance of $1.2 billion related to the addition of the $26.2 billion in outstanding receivables acquired in the 2012 U.S. card acquisition that had existing revolving privileges at acquisition. The allowance for these loans was calculated using the same methodology utilized for determining the allowance for our existing credit card loan portfolio. On October 29, 2012, Hurricane Sandy made landfall on the New Jersey coast, resulting in severe disaster in coastal counties in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York and varying degrees of damage and disruption in other Northeast and Mid-Atlantic states. Because we have significant consumer and commercial loan exposure in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York, the storm and its aftermath resulted in an elevated risk of loss for us within this region. Based on our assessment of the impact of Hurricane Sandy on our loan portfolio, we recorded an allowance of $39 million as of December 31, 2012, which is included in our allowance for loan and lease losses of $5.2 billion as of December 31, 2012. Although the allowance increased in 2012, the coverage ratio of the allowance to total loans held for investment fell by 63 basis points to 2.50% as of December 31, 2012, from 3.13% as of December 31, 2011. The decrease in the allowance coverage ratio was largely due to the addition of loans acquired in the ING Direct and 2012 U.S. card acquisitions accounted for based on estimated cash flows expected to be collected. As discussed above in Item 6. Selected Financial Data, because the accounting for these loans takes into consideration future credit losses expected to be incurred, there are no charge-offs or an allowance associated with these loans unless the estimated cash flows expected to be collected decrease subsequent to acquisition. We describe our methodology for determining our allowance for loan and lease losses, by loan category, in Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses. Also, see Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses and Note 6 Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses for additional information. LIQUIDITY RISK PROFILE We have established liquidity guidelines that are intended to ensure that we have sufficient asset-based liquidity to withstand the potential impact of deposit attrition or diminished liquidity in the funding markets. Our guidelines include maintaining an adequate liquidity reserve to cover our potential funding requirements and diversified funding sources to avoid over-dependence on volatile, less reliable funding markets. Our liquidity reserves consist of cash and cash equivalents and unencumbered available-for-sale securities. Table 25 below presents the fair value of our liquidity reserves as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 25: Liquidity Reserves December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 Cash and cash equivalents $ 11,058 $ 5,838 Investment securities available for sale (1) 63,979 38,759 Less: Pledged investment securities available for sale (13,811 ) (8,762 ) Unencumbered investment securities available for sale 50,168 29,997 Total liquidity reserves $ 61,226 $ 35,835 (1) The weighted average life of our available-for-sale securities was approximately 4.3 and 2.9 years as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. 111 Table of Contents Our liquidity reserves increased by $25.4 billion, or 71%, in 2012, to $61.2 billion as of December 31, 2012. This increase reflected the addition of $30.2 billion of investment securities available for sale from the ING Direct acquisition, which was partially offset by the sale of $16.9 billion of investment securities. It also reflects an increase of $5.2 billion in cash and cash equivalents, which includes higher cash held as of December 31, 2012 in anticipation of the January 2, 2013 redemption of the $3.65 billion in trust preferred securities. Funding Our funding objective is to establish an appropriate maturity profile using a cost-effective mix of both short-term and long-term funds. We use a variety of funding sources, including deposits, short-term borrowings, the issuance of senior and subordinated notes and other borrowings, and, to a lesser extent, loan securitization transactions. In addition, we utilize FHLB advances, which are secured by certain portions of our loan and investment securities portfolios, for our funding needs. Deposits Our deposits provide a stable and relatively low cost of funds and are our largest source of funding. Table 26 provides a summary of the composition of period end, average deposits, interest expense and the average deposit rate paid for 2012, 2011 and 2010. Table 26: Deposit Composition and Average Deposit Rates December 31, 2012 (Dollars in millions) Period End Balance Average Balance Interest Expense % of Average Deposits Average Deposit Rate Non-interest bearing $ 22,467 $ 19,741 N/A 9.7 % N/A Negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts 40,591 34,179 $ 212 16.8 0.62 % Money market deposit accounts 104,540 99,734 684 49.1 0.69 Savings accounts 28,285 30,457 101 15.0 0.33 Other consumer time deposits 11,028 12,762 258 6.4 2.02 Total core deposits 206,911 196,873 1,255 97.0 0.64 Public fund certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more 51 70 0 0.0 0.00 Certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more 4,444 4,806 144 2.4 3.00 Foreign time deposits 1,079 1,305 4 0.6 0.31 Total customer deposits $ 212,485 $ 203,054 $ 1,403 100.0 % 0.69 % 112 Table of Contents December 31, 2011 (Dollars in millions) Period End Balance Average Balance Interest Expense % of Average Deposits Average Deposit Rate Non-interest bearing $ 18,281 $ 17,051 N/A 13.5 % N/A NOW accounts 15,038 13,285 $ 41 10.5 0.31 % Money market deposit accounts 46,496 46,455 396 36.6 0.85 Savings accounts 31,433 29,640 218 23.4 0.74 Other consumer time deposits 11,471 13,855 351 10.9 2.53 Total core deposits 122,719 120,286 1,006 94.9 0.84 Public fund certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more 85 108 2 0.1 1.85 Certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more 4,501 5,526 175 4.4 3.17 Foreign time deposits 921 774 4 0.6 0.52 Total customer deposits $ 128,226 $ 126,694 $ 1,187 100.0 % 0.94 % December 31, 2010 (Dollars in millions) Period End Balance Average Balance Interest Expense % of Average Deposits Average Deposit Rate Non-interest bearing $ 15,048 $ 14,267 N/A 12.0 % N/A NOW accounts 13,536 12,032 $ 36 10.1 0.30 % Money market deposit accounts 44,485 42,159 409 35.4 0.97 Savings accounts 26,077 21,854 188 18.4 0.86 Other consumer time deposits 15,753 20,655 585 17.4 2.83 Total core deposits 114,899 110,967 1,218 93.3 1.10 Public fund certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more 177 265 5 0.2 2.03 Certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more 6,300 6,912 237 5.8 3.43 Foreign time deposits 834 866 5 0.7 0.57 Total customer deposits $ 122,210 $ 119,010 $ 1,465 100.0 % 1.23 % Total deposits increased by $84.3 billion, or 66%, in 2012 to $212.5 billion as of December 31, 2012. The increase in deposits reflects the addition of $84.4 billion in deposits from the ING Direct acquisition and increased retail marketing efforts to attract new business and our continued strategy to leverage our bank outlets to attract lower cost deposit funding. Approximately $1.1 billion and $921 million of our total customer deposits were held in foreign banking offices as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. We have brokered deposits which we obtained through the use of third-party intermediaries. Brokered deposits are included in money market deposit accounts and other consumer time deposits in Table 26 above. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 limits the use of brokered deposits to well-capitalized insured depository institutions and, with a waiver from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to adequately capitalized institutions. COBNA and CONA were well-capitalized, as defined under the federal banking regulatory guidelines, as of December 31, 2012, and therefore permitted to maintain brokered deposits. Our brokered deposits totaled $10.0 billion, or 5% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2012 and $13.0 billion, or 10% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2011. We expect to replace maturing brokered deposits with new brokered deposits or other sources of funding, which may include branch or direct deposits. 113 Table of Contents Table 27 presents the contractual maturities of large-denomination time deposits of $100,000 or more. Our funding and liquidity management activities factor into the expected maturities of these deposits. Based on past activity, we expect to retain a portion of these deposits as they mature. Accordingly, we expect the actual net cash outflows will be less than the contractual maturity amounts. Table 27: Maturities of Large Domestic Denomination Certificates $100,000 or More December 31, 2012 2011 (Dollars in millions) Amount % of Total Amount % of Total Up to three months $ 447 10.0 % $ 496 10.8 % > 3 months to 6 months 451 10.0 460 10.0 > 6 months to 12 months 1,948 43.3 643 14.0 > 12 months to 10 years 1,649 36.7 2,987 65.2 Total $ 4,495 100.0 % $ 4,586 100.0 % Short-Term Borrowings We also have access to and utilize various other short-term borrowings to support our operations. These borrowings are generally in the form of federal funds purchased and resale agreements. In addition, we may utilize short-term as well as long-term FHLB advances for our funding needs. FHLB advances are secured by certain of our loan portfolios and investment securities. Our short-term borrowings typically have not represented a significant portion of our overall funding. In the fourth quarter of 2012, however, we significantly increased our short-term FHLB advances in our portfolio to build our liquidity in anticipation of the redemption of the $3.65 billion in outstanding trust preferred securities on January 2, 2013, as well as to cover seasonal loan growth and to fund increases in our investment securities. Table 28 provides information on our short-term borrowings in 2012, 2011 and 2010. Table 28: Short-Term Borrowings (Dollars in millions) Maximum Month-End Outstanding Amount Year-End Outstanding Amount Average Outstanding Amount Average Interest Rate Year-End Weighted Average Interest Rate 2012: Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase $ 1,381 $ 1,248 $ 1,018 0.18 % 0.28 % FHLB advances 19,900 19,900 7,169 0.25 0.27 2011: Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase $ 2,111 $ 1,464 $ 2,186 0.21 % 0.30 % FHLB advances 5,835 5,835 1,110 0.19 0.13 2010: Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase $ 2,469 $ 1,517 $ 1,731 0.23 % 0.13 % 114 Table of Contents Other Funding Sources We also access the capital markets to meet our funding needs through the use of federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase, the issuance of senior and subordinated notes, other borrowings, and loan securitization transactions. In addition, we utilize advances from the FHLB for our funding needs. FHLB advances are secured by certain of our loan portfolios and investment securities. Our debt, including federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase, senior and subordinated notes and other borrowings, such as FHLB advances, but excluding securitized debt obligations, totaled $38.5 billion as of December 31, 2012, up from $23.0 billion as of December 31, 2011. The $15.5 billion increase in our debt, excluding securitized debt obligations, was primarily attributable to the proceeds of approximately $2.3 billion from the issuance of senior notes, a $14.1 billion increase in short-term FHLB advances, as well as a decrease of $632 million due to the maturity of one senior note. We regularly participate in the federal funds market to take advantage of attractive offers and to keep a visible presence in the market, which is intended to ensure that we are able to access the federal funds market in a time of need. We expect monthly fluctuations in our borrowings, as borrowing amounts are highly dependent on our counterparties cash positions. Table 29 presents our short-term borrowings, long-term debt and the maturity profile based on expected maturities as of December 31, 2012. We provide additional information on our short-term borrowings and long-term debt in Note 10 Deposits and Borrowings. Table 29: Contractual Maturity Profile of Short-term Borrowings and Long-term Debt December 31, 2012 (Dollars in millions) Up to 1 Year > 1 Year to 2 Years > 2 Years to 3 Years > 3 Years to 4 Years > 4 Years to 5 Years > 5 Years Total Short-term borrowings: Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase $ 1,248 $ $ $ $ $ $ 1,248 FHLB advances 19,900 19,900 Total short-term borrowings 21,148 21,148 Long-term debt: Securitized debt obligations 2,628 2,900 502 1,329 3,764 275 11,398 Senior and subordinated notes: Unsecured senior debt 285 2,313 2,663 760 1,793 1,309 9,123 Unsecured subordinated debt 507 104 1,174 0 1,778 3,563 Total senior and subordinated notes 792 2,417 2,663 1,934 1,793 3,087 12,686 Other long-term borrowings: Junior subordinated debt 3,641 3,641 FHLB advances 16 945 22 20 19 15 1,037 Total other long-term borrowings 16 945 22 20 19 3,656 4,678 Total long-term debt (1) 3,436 6,262 3,187 3,283 5,576 7,018 28,762 Total short-term borrowings and long-term debt $ 24,584 $ 6,262 $ 3,187 $ 3,283 $ 5,576 $ 7,018 $ 49,910 Percentage of total 49 % 13 % 6 % 7 % 11 % 14 % 100 % (1) Includes unamortized discounts, premiums and other cost basis adjustments of $30 million as of December 31, 2012. 115 Table of Contents Borrowing Capacity We filed a new effective shelf registration statement with the SEC on April 30, 2012, which will expire three years from the filing date, under which, from time to time, we may offer and sell an indeterminate aggregate amount of senior or subordinated debt securities, preferred stock, depository shares, common stock, purchase contracts, warrants and units. There is no limit under this shelf registration statement to the amount or number of such securities that we may offer and sell, subject to market conditions. In addition to issuance capacity under the shelf registration statement, we also have access to FHLB Advances and Letters of Credit with a maximum borrowing capacity of $ 38.2 billion as of December 31, 2012. This borrowing capacity was secured by posting $32.6 billion of loans and $5.6 billion of securities as collateral. We had $21.2 billion outstanding as of December 31, 2012, and $17.0 billion still available to us to borrow against under this program. This funding source is non-revolving and funding availability is subject to market conditions. The ability to draw down funding is based on membership status and the amount is dependent upon the Banks ability to post collateral. Our FHLB membership and borrowings are secured by our investment in FHLB stock, which totaled $1.3 billion and $362 as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Covenants The terms of certain lease and credit facility agreements related to other borrowings and operating leases include several financial covenants that require performance measures and equity ratios to be met. If these covenants are not met, there may be an acceleration of the payment due dates noted in Table 29. As of December 31, 2012, we were not in default of any such covenants. Credit Ratings Our credit ratings have a significant impact on our ability to access capital markets and our borrowing costs. Rating agencies base their ratings on numerous factors, including liquidity, capital adequacy, asset quality, quality of earnings and the probability of systemic support. Significant changes in these factors could result in different ratings. Such ratings help to support our cost effective unsecured funding as part of our overall financing programs. Table 30 provides a summary of the credit ratings for the senior unsecured debt of Capital One Financial Corporation, COBNA and CONA as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Table 30: Senior Unsecured Debt Credit Ratings 2012 2011 Capital One Financial Corporation Capital One Bank (USA), N.A. Capital One, N.A. Capital One Financial Corporation Capital One Bank (USA), N.A. Capital One, N.A. Moody Baa1 A3 A3 Baa1 A3 A3 S&P BBB BBB+ BBB+ BBB BBB+ BBB+ Fitch A- A- A- A- A- A- * low ** high As of February 25, 2013, Moody and Fitch have categorized us as a stable outlook, while S&P categorized us as negative outlook. Contractual Obligations In the normal course of business, we enter into various contractual obligations that may require future cash payments that affect our short- and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs. Our future cash outflows 116 Table of Contents primarily relate to deposits, borrowings and operating leases. Table 31 summarizes, by remaining contractual maturity, our significant contractual cash obligations based on the undiscounted future cash payments as of December 31, 2012. The actual timing and amounts of future cash payments may differ from the amounts presented below due to a number of factors, such as discretionary debt repurchases. Table 31 excludes certain obligations where the obligation is short-term or subject to valuation based on market factors, such as trade payables and trading liabilities. The table also excludes the representation and warranty reserve of $899 million as of December 31, 2012 and obligations for pension and postretirement benefit plans, which are discussed in more detail in Note 17 Employee Benefit Plans. Table 31: Contractual Obligations December 31, 2012 (Dollars in millions) Up to 1 Year > 1 Year to 3 Years > 3 Years to 5 Years > 5 Years Total Interest-bearing time deposits (1) $ 10,855 $ 3,765 $ 468 $ 435 $ 15,523 Securitized debt obligations 2,628 3,402 5,093 275 11,398 Other debt: Federal funds purchased and securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase 1,248 1,248 Senior and subordinated notes 792 5,080 3,727 3,087 12,686 Other borrowings (2) 19,916 967 39 3,656 24,578 Total other debt 21,956 6,047 3,766 6,743 38,512 Operating leases 212 399 346 801 1,758 Purchase obligations (3)(4) 295 142 92 529 Total $ 35,946 $ 13,755 $ 9,765 $ 8,254 $ 67,720 (1) Includes only those interest-bearing deposits which have a contractual maturity date. (2) Other borrowings include junior subordinated debt and FHLB advances. (3) Represents agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and specify all significant terms. The purchase obligations are included through the termination date of the agreements even if the contract is renewable. These include capital expenditures, contractual commitments to purchase equipment and services, software acquisition/license commitments, contractual minimum media commitments and any contractually required cash payments for acquisitions. (4) Excludes funding commitments entered into in the ordinary course of business. See Note 21 Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees for further details. MARKET RISK PROFILE Market risk is inherent in the financial instruments associated with our operations and activities, including loans, deposits, securities, short-term borrowings, long-term debt and derivatives. Below we provide additional information about our primary sources of market risk, our market risk management strategies and measures used to evaluate our market risk exposure. Primary Market Risk Exposures Our primary sources of market risk include interest rate risk and foreign exchange risk. Interest Rate Risk Interest rate risk, which represents exposure to instruments whose yield or price varies with the level or volatility of interest rates, is our most significant source of market risk exposure. Banks are inevitably exposed to interest 117 Table of Contents rate risk due to differences in the timing between the maturities or repricing of assets and liabilities. For example, if more assets are repricing than deposits and other borrowings when interest rates are declining, our earnings will decrease. Similarly, if more deposits and other borrowings are repricing than assets when interest rates are rising, our earnings will decrease. Interest rate risk also results from changes in customer behavior and competitors responses to changes in interest rates or other market conditions. For example, decreases in mortgage rates generally result in faster than expected prepayments, which may adversely affect earnings. Increases in interest rates, coupled with strong demand from competitors for deposits, may influence industry pricing. Such competition may affect customer decisions to maintain balances in the deposit accounts, which may require replacing lower cost deposits with higher cost alternative sources of funding. Foreign Exchange Risk Foreign exchange risk represents exposure to changes in the values of current holdings and future cash flows denominated in other currencies. The types of instruments exposed to this risk include investments in foreign subsidiaries, foreign currency-denominated loans and securities, future cash flows in foreign currencies arising from foreign exchange transactions, foreign currency-denominated debt and various foreign exchange derivative instruments whose values fluctuate with changes in the level or volatility of currency exchange rates or foreign interest rates. We are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates, which may impact the earnings of our foreign operations. We monitor and manage our material foreign currency denominated transactions and exposures through the use of derivatives to limit our earnings sensitivity exposure to foreign exchange risk. The estimated reduction in our 12-month earnings due to adverse foreign exchange rate movements corresponding to a 95% probability was less than 2.0% as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. The precision of this estimate is limited due to the inherent uncertainty of the underlying forecast assumptions. Market Risk Management We employ several techniques to manage our interest rate and foreign currency risk, which include, but are not limited to, changing the maturity and re-pricing characteristics of our various assets and liabilities. Derivatives are one of the primary tools we use in managing interest rate and foreign exchange risk. We execute our derivative contracts in both over-the-counter and exchange-traded derivative markets. Although the majority of our derivatives are interest rate swaps, we also use a variety of other derivative instruments, including caps, floors, options, futures and forward contracts, to manage our interest rate and foreign currency risk. The outstanding notional amount of our derivative contracts decreased to $57.8 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $73.2 billion as of December 31, 2011. The decrease in the notional amount of our derivative contracts was primarily attributable to the termination of the ING Direct-related swap transactions that were executed to manage the anticipated impact of the ING Direct acquisition on our market risk exposure and regulatory capital requirements. From the date we entered into the agreement to acquire ING Direct to early August 2011, interest rates declined substantially, which resulted in an increase in the estimated fair value of the ING Direct net assets and liabilities. In order to capture some of the anticipated benefits to regulatory capital on the closing date attributable to this decline in interest rates, we entered into various interest-rate swap transactions with a total notional principal amount of approximately $24.8 billion. These combined swap transactions were intended to mitigate the effect of a rise in interest rates on the fair values of a significant portion of the ING Direct assets and liabilities during the period from when we entered into the swap transactions to the anticipated closing date of the ING Direct acquisition in early 2012. In conjunction with our close of the ING Direct acquisition on February 17, 2012, we terminated the ING Direct-related swap transactions. 118 Table of Contents Market Risk Measurement We have prescribed risk management policies and limits established by our Asset/Liability Management Committee and approved by the Finance Committee of the Board. Our objective is to manage our asset/liability risk position and exposure to market risk in accordance with these policies and prescribed limits based on prevailing market conditions and long-term expectations. Because no single measure can reflect all aspects of market risk, we use various industry standard market risk measurement techniques and analyses to measure, assess and manage the impact of changes in interest rates and foreign exchange rates on our earnings and the economic value of equity. We consider the impact on both earnings and economic value of equity in measuring and managing our interest rate risk. Our earnings sensitivity measure estimates the impact on net interest income and the valuation of our mortgage servicing rights, including derivative hedging activity, resulting from movements in interest rates. Our economic value of equity sensitivity measure estimates the impact on the net present value of our assets and liabilities, including derivative hedging activity, resulting from movements in interest rates. Our economic value of equity sensitivity measurements are based on our existing assets and liabilities, including derivatives, and do not incorporate business growth assumptions or projected plans for funding mix changes. The federal funds rate remained at a target range of zero to 0.25% during 2012. Given the level of short-term rates as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, a scenario where interest rates would decline by 200 basis points is not plausible. In 2008, we temporarily revised our customary declining interest rate scenario of 200 basis points to a 50 basis point decrease, except in scenarios where a 50 basis point decline would result in a rate less than 0% (in which case we assume a rate scenario of 0%), to compensate for the continued low rate environment. Our current asset/liability management policy also includes the use of derivatives to hedge material foreign currency denominated transactions to limit our earnings exposure to foreign exchange risk. Table 32 shows the estimated percentage impact on our adjusted projected net interest income and economic value of equity, calculated under alternative hypothetical interest rate scenarios, as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Our adjusted projected net interest income consists of net interest income adjusted to include changes in the fair value of mortgage servicing rights, including related derivative hedging activity, and changes in the fair value of free-standing interest rate swaps. In measuring the sensitivity of interest rate movements on our adjusted projected net interest income, we assume a hypothetical gradual increase in interest rates of 200 basis points and a hypothetical gradual decrease of 50 basis points relative to implied forward rates over the next twelve months. In measuring the sensitivity of interest rate movements on our economic value of equity, we assume a hypothetical instantaneous parallel shift in the level of interest rates of plus 200 basis points and minus 50 basis points to spot rates. We recently revised two assumptions used to calculate our earnings sensitivity measures. First, in addition to our existing assets and liabilities, we now incorporate expected future business growth assumptions, such as loan and deposit growth and pricing, and plans for projected changes in our funding mix in our baseline forecast. Second, we changed the interest rate scenario used to measure and evaluate the impact on the baseline forecast to assess our earnings sensitivity. We previously measured our earnings sensitivity assuming a gradual plus or minus 200 basis point change in forward rates. Our assumption is now based on an instantaneous plus or minus 200 basis point shock as described above, with the lower rate scenario limited to zero. We will continue to factor into our interest rate risk management decisions the potential impact of alternative interest rate scenarios, such as stressed rate shocks as well as steepening and flattening yield curve scenarios, for all of sensitivity measures. Table 32 includes our earnings sensitivity as of December 31, 2012 based on our revised methodology, as well as our previous methodology. Our revised methodology results in a slightly higher asset sensitivity position, which is attributable to a higher forecasted volume of rate sensitive assets versus rate sensitive liabilities and the impact of a more severe instantaneous shock. We have not revised our methodology for measuring our economic value of equity sensitivities. Accordingly, the economic value sensitivity measures presented under our revised methodology are the same as those presented under our previous methodology. 119 Table of Contents Table 32: Interest Rate Sensitivity Analysis December 31, 2011 (Dollars in millions) December 31, 2012 Excluding ING Direct Swaps (1) Including ING Direct Swaps Previous methodology: Impact on adjusted projected base-line net interest income: + 200 basis points 1.3 % 1.2 % 13.7 % -50 basis points (0.9 ) (0.5 ) (3.9 ) Impact on economic value of equity: + 200 basis points (3.1 ) (1.0 ) 3.2 -50 basis points (1.4 ) (0.4 ) (1.5 ) Revised methodology: Impact on adjusted projected base-line net interest income: + 200 basis points 2.7 % NA NA -50 basis points (1.7 ) NA NA Impact on economic value of equity: + 200 basis points (3.1 ) (1.0 ) 3.2 -50 basis points (1.4 ) (0.4 ) (1.5 ) NA Comparable information for December 31, 2011 is not available. (1) Calculated excluding the impact of the interest rate swap transactions of approximately $24.8 billion entered into to mitigate some of the interest rate risk related to the ING Direct acquisition. Because of the large but temporary impact of the ING Direct-related swap transactions on our standard interest rate risk reporting measures, we expanded our standard interest rate sensitivity analysis to present our interest rate risk measures as of December 31, 2011 both with and without the impact of the $24.8 billion of interest rate swaps described above. This presentation highlights changes in our core interest rate risk profile and the incremental impact of the ING Direct-related swaps on our core profile over the time period that the swaps remained outstanding. Excluding the $24.8 billion swap transactions, our interest rate sensitivity measures reflect that we became modestly more asset sensitive between December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2012. Our projected net interest income and economic value of equity sensitivity measures, both including and excluding the impact of the ING Direct related swap transactions, were within our prescribed asset/liability policy limits as of December 31, 2012 and 2011. Additionally, the new earnings sensitivity method results in a slightly higher asset sensitivity position compared to the previous method, resulting from a higher forecasted volume of rate sensitive assets versus rate sensitive liabilities in addition to the impact of an instantaneous rate shock. Limitations of Market Risk Measures The interest rate risk models that we use in deriving these measures incorporate contractual information, internally-developed assumptions and proprietary modeling methodologies, which project borrower and deposit behavior patterns in certain interest rate environments. Other market inputs, such as interest rates, market prices and interest rate volatility, are also critical components of our interest rate risk measures. We regularly evaluate, update and enhance these assumptions, models and analytical tools as we believe appropriate to reflect our best assessment of the market environment and the expected behavior patterns of our existing assets and liabilities. There are inherent limitations in any methodology used to estimate the exposure to changes in market interest rates. The above sensitivity analyses contemplate only certain movements in interest rates and are performed at a particular point in time based on the existing balance sheet and, in some cases, expected future business growth and funding mix assumptions. The strategic actions that management may take to manage our balance sheet may differ from our projections, which could cause our actual earnings and economic value of equity sensitivities to differ from the above sensitivity analyses. 120 Table of Contents SUPPLEMENTAL TABLES See Item 6. Selected Financial Data for information on our supplemental non-GAAP managed results, which we presented prior to our January 1, 2010 prospective adoption of the new consolidation standards. The adoption of these new accounting standards resulted in the consolidation of substantially all of our securitization trusts. As a result, our reported and managed based presentations are generally comparable for periods beginning after January 1, 2010. Table A Loan Portfolio Composition December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Reported loans held for investment: Credit Card: Credit card loans: Domestic credit card loans $ 82,328 $ 54,682 $ 49,979 $ 13,374 $ 20,624 International credit card loans 8,614 8,466 7,513 2,229 2,872 Total credit card loans 90,942 63,148 57,492 15,603 23,496 Installment loans: Domestic installment loans 813 1,927 3,870 6,693 10,131 International installment loans 9 44 119 Total installment loans 813 1,927 3,879 6,737 10,250 Total credit card 91,755 65,075 61,371 22,340 33,746 Consumer Banking: Auto 27,123 21,779 17,867 18,186 21,495 Home loan 44,100 10,433 12,103 14,893 10,098 Retail banking 3,904 4,103 4,413 5,135 5,604 Total consumer banking 75,127 36,315 34,383 38,214 37,197 Total consumer loans 166,882 101,390 95,754 60,554 70,943 Commercial Banking: Commercial and multifamily real estate 17,732 15,736 13,619 13,995 13,388 Commercial and industrial 19,892 17,088 14,504 13,617 13,629 Total commercial lending 37,624 32,824 28,123 27,612 27,017 Small-ticket commercial real estate 1,196 1,503 1,842 2,153 2,609 Total commercial banking 38,820 34,327 29,965 29,765 29,626 Other: Other loans 187 175 228 300 449 Total reported loans held for investment $ 205,889 $ 135,892 $ 125,947 $ 90,619 $ 101,018 121 Table of Contents December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Securitization adjustments: Credit Card business: Credit card loans: Domestic credit card loans $ $ $ $ 39,827 $ 39,254 International credit card loans 5,951 5,729 Total credit card loans 45,778 44,983 Installment loans: Domestic installment loans 406 936 Consumer Banking: Auto Total consumer banking Total securitization adjustments $ $ $ $ 46,184 $ 45,919 Managed loans held for investment: Credit Card business: Credit card loans: Domestic credit card loans $ 82,328 $ 54,682 $ 49,979 $ 53,201 $ 59,878 International credit card loans 8,614 8,466 7,513 8,180 8,601 Total credit card loans 90,942 63,148 57,492 61,381 68,479 Installment loans: Domestic installment loans 813 1,927 3,870 7,099 11,067 International installment loans 9 44 119 Total installment loans 813 1,927 3,879 7,143 11,186 Total credit card 91,755 65,075 61,371 68,524 79,665 Consumer Banking: Auto 27,123 21,779 17,867 18,186 21,495 Home loan 44,100 10,433 12,103 14,893 10,098 Retail banking 3,904 4,103 4,413 5,135 5,604 Total consumer banking 75,127 36,315 34,383 38,214 37,197 Total consumer loans 166,882 101,390 95,754 106,738 116,862 Commercial Banking: Commercial and multifamily real estate 17,732 15,736 13,619 13,995 13,388 Commercial and industrial 19,892 17,088 14,504 13,617 13,629 Total commercial lending 37,624 32,824 28,123 27,612 27,017 Small-ticket commercial real estate 1,196 1,503 1,842 2,153 2,609 Total commercial banking 38,820 34,327 29,965 29,765 29,626 Other: Other loans 187 175 228 300 449 Total managed loans held for investment $ 205,889 $ 135,892 $ 125,947 $ 136,803 $ 146,937 122 Table of Contents Table B Performing Delinquencies December 31, 2012 (2) 2011 (2) 2010 (2) 2009 (2) 2008 (Dollars in millions) Loans % of Total Loans (3) Loans % of Total Loans (3 ) Loans % of Total Loans (3) Loans % of Total Loans (3) Loans % of Total Loans (3) Reported: (1) Loans held for investment $ 205,889 100.00 % $ 135,892 100.00 % $ 125,947 100.00 % $ 90,619 100.00 % $ 101,018 100.00 % Delinquent loans: 30-59 days $ 2,629 1.28 % $ 2,267 1.67 % $ 1,968 1.56 % $ 1,908 2.10 % $ 2,325 2.30 % 60-89 days 1,399 0.68 1,043 0.77 1,064 0.85 985 1.09 1,094 1.08 90-119 days 628 0.30 497 0.36 559 0.44 356 0.39 410 0.41 120-149 days 485 0.24 390 0.29 446 0.36 190 0.21 230 0.23 150 or more days 414 0.20 355 0.26 393 0.31 164 0.18 194 0.19 Total $ 5,555 2.70 % $ 4,552 3.35 % $ 4,430 3.52 % $ 3,603 3.98 % $ 4,253 4.21 % By geographic area: Domestic $ 5,247 2.55 % $ 4,114 3.03 % $ 3,998 3.18 % $ 3,460 3.82 % $ 4,107 4.07 % International 308 0.15 438 0.32 432 0.34 143 0.16 146 0.14 Total $ 5,555 2.70 % $ 4,552 3.35 % $ 4,430 3.52 % $ 3,603 3.98 % $ 4,253 4.21 % Managed: (1) Loans held for investment $ 205,889 100.00 % $ 135,892 100.00 % $ 125,947 100.00 % $ 136,803 100.00 % $ 146,937 100.00 % Delinquent loans: 30-59 days $ 2,629 1.28 % $ 2,267 1.67 % $ 1,968 1.56 % $ 2,623 1.92 % $ 2,987 2.03 % 60-89 days 1,399 0.68 1,043 0.77 1,064 0.84 1,576 1.15 1,582 1.08 90-119 days 628 0.30 497 0.36 559 0.44 895 0.65 817 0.56 120-149 days 485 0.24 390 0.29 446 0.35 660 0.48 569 0.39 150 or more days 414 0.20 355 0.26 393 0.31 568 0.42 476 0.32 Total $ 5,555 2.70 % $ 4,552 3.35 % $ 4,430 3.52 % $ 6,322 4.62 % $ 6,431 4.38 % By geographic area: Domestic $ 5,247 2.55 % $ 4,114 3.03 % $ 3,998 3.18 % $ 5,783 4.23 % $ 5,915 4.03 % International 308 0.15 438 0.32 432 0.34 539 0.39 516 0.35 Total $ 5,555 2.70 % $ 4,552 3.35 % $ 4,430 3.52 % $ 6,322 4.62 % $ 6,431 4.38 % (1) Credit card loan balances are reported net of the finance charge and fee reserve, which totaled $307 million, $74 million, $211 million, $624 million, $630 million as of December 31, 2012, 2011, 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. (2) Acquired loan portfolio is included in loans held for investment, but excluded from delinquent loans as these loans are considered performing in accordance with our expectations as of the purchase date, as we recorded these loans at estimated fair value when we acquired them. As of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the acquired loan portfolio contractual 30 to 89 day delinquencies total $369 million, $162 million and $199 million, respectively. For loans 90+ days past due, see Table C Nonperforming Assets. (3) Calculated by dividing loans in each delinquency status category and geographic region as of the end of the period by the total loan portfolio. 123 Table of Contents Table C Nonperforming Assets December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Nonperforming loans held for investment: (1)(2) (3) Credit Card: International Credit Card $ 100 $ $ $ $ Total credit card 100 Consumer Banking: Auto 149 $ 106 $ 99 $ 143 $ 165 Home loan 422 456 486 323 104 Retail banking ( 4 ) 101 125 145 121 150 Total consumer banking 672 687 730 587 419 Commercial Banking: Commercial and multifamily real estate 137 207 276 429 142 Commercial and industrial 133 125 181 178 76 Total commercial lending 270 332 457 607 218 Small-ticket commercial real estate 12 40 38 95 167 Total commercial banking 282 372 495 702 385 Total nonperforming loans held for investment 1,054 1,059 1,225 1,289 804 Other nonperforming assets: Foreclosed property ( 5 ) 204 169 306 234 89 Repossessed assets 22 20 20 24 66 Total nonperforming assets $ 1,280 $ 1,248 $ 1,551 $ 1,547 $ 959 Nonperforming loans as a percentage of loans held for investment (2) 0.51 % 0.78 % 0.97 % 0.94 % 0.80 % Nonperforming assets as a percentage of loans held for investment plus total other nonperforming assets (2) 0.62 % 0.92 % 1.23 % 1.13 % 0.95 % (1) The ratio of nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans held for investment is calculated based on the nonperforming loans in each loan category divided by the total outstanding unpaid principal balance of loans held for investment in each loan category. The denominator used in calculating the nonperforming asset ratios consists of total loans held for investment and other nonperforming assets. (2) Our calculation of nonperforming loan and asset ratios includes the impact of acquired loans. However, we do not report acquired loans as nonperforming unless they do not perform in accordance with our expectations as of the purchase date, as we recorded these loans at estimated fair value when we acquired them. The nonperforming loan ratios, excluding the impact of acquired loans for commercial and multifamily real estate, commercial and industrial, total commercial banking, home loan, retail banking, total consumer banking, and total nonperforming loans held for investment were 0.78%, 0.68%, 0.73%, 5.48%, 1.83%, 1.66% and 0.62%, respectively, as of December 31, 2012, compared with 1.33%, 0.75%, 1.10%, 7.22%, 2.21%, 2.03% and 0.81%, respectively, as of December 31, 2011. The nonperforming asset ratio, excluding acquired loans, was 0.76% and 0.95% as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. (3) The performing loan modifications and restructuring totaled $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, and $1.0 billion and $713 million as of December 31, 2010 and 2009. There were an immaterial amount of loan modifications and restructurings in 2008. ( 4 ) Other loans are included in retail banking for all years presented. (5) Includes foreclosed properties related to acquired loans of $167 million, $86 million and $201 million as of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. 124 Table of Contents Table D Net Charge-offs (1) Year Ended December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Reported: Average loans held for investment (2) $ 187,915 $ 128,424 $ 128,526 $ 99,787 $ 98,971 Net charge-offs 3,555 3,771 6,651 4,568 3,478 Net charge-off rate (3) 1.89 % 2.94 % 5.18 % 4.58 % 3.51 % Managed: Average loans held for investment (2) $ 187,915 $ 128,424 $ 128,622 $ 143,514 $ 147,812 Net charge-offs 3,555 3,771 6,657 8,421 6,425 Net charge-off rate (3) 1.89 % 2.94 % 5.18 % 5.87 % 4.35 % (1) Net charge-offs reflect charge-offs, net of recoveries, related to our total held-for-investment loan portfolio, which we previously referred to as our managed loan portfolio. The total held-for-investment loan portfolio includes loans recorded on our balance sheet and loans held in our securitization trusts. (2) The average balance of acquired loans, which are included in the total average loans held for investment used in calculating the net charge-off rates, was $36.2 billion, $5.0 billion, $6.3 billion and $6.8 billion in 2012, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. There were no acquired loans included in the total average loans held for investment in 2008. (3) Calculated for each loan category by dividing net charge-offs for the period divided by average loans held for investment during the period. 125 Table of Contents Table E Summary of Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Balance as of beginning of period, as reported $ 4,250 $ 5,628 $ 4,127 $ 4,524 $ 2,963 Impact from January 1, 2010 adoption of new consolidation accounting standards 4,317 (1) Balance at beginning of period, as adjusted 4,250 5,628 8,444 4,524 2,963 Provision for credit losses 4,446 2,401 3,895 4,230 5,101 Charge-offs: Domestic credit card and installment loans (3,507 ) (3,558 ) (6,020 ) (3,050 ) (2,244 ) International credit card and installment loans (652 ) (752 ) (761 ) (284 ) (255 ) Consumer banking (797 ) (732 ) (898 ) (1,357 ) (1,396 ) Commercial banking (94 ) (214 ) (445 ) (444 ) (87 ) Other loans (43 ) (59 ) (114 ) (207 ) (169 ) Total charge-offs (5,093 ) (5,315 ) (8,238 ) (5,342 ) (4,151 ) Recoveries: Domestic credit card and installment loans 975 1,036 1,113 447 425 International credit card and installment loans 240 218 169 52 65 Consumer banking 266 248 243 263 178 Commercial banking 52 37 54 10 4 Other loans 5 5 8 2 1 Total recoveries 1,538 1,544 1,587 774 673 Net charge-offs (3,555 ) (3,771 ) (6,651 ) (4,568 ) (3,478 ) Impact from acquisitions, sales and other changes 15 (8 ) (60 ) (59 ) (62 ) Balance at the end of period $ 5,156 $ 4,250 $ 5,628 $ 4,127 $ 4,524 Allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of loans held for investment 2.50 % 3.13 % 4.47 % 4.55 % 4.48 % Allowance for loan and lease losses by geographic distribution: Domestic $ 4,703 $ 3,778 $ 5,168 $ 3,928 $ 4,331 International 453 472 460 199 193 Total $ 5,156 $ 4,250 $ 5,628 $ 4,127 $ 4,524 Allowance for loan and lease losses by loan category: Domestic card $ 3,526 $ 2,375 $ 3,581 $ 1,927 $ 2,544 International card 453 472 460 199 193 Consumer banking 711 652 675 1,076 1,314 Commercial banking 433 715 830 786 301 Other 33 36 82 139 172 Total $ 5,156 $ 4,250 $ 5,628 $ 4,127 $ 4,524 (1) Includes an adjustment of $53 million made in the second quarter of 2010 for the impact as of January 1, 2010 of impairment on consolidated loans accounted for as TDRs. 126 Table of Contents Table F Reconciliation of Non-Gaap Measures and Calculation of Regulatory Capital Measures Under Basel I December 31, (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Stockholders equity to non-GAAP tangible common equity Total stockholders equity $ 40,499 $ 29,666 $ 26,541 $ 26,590 $ 26,611 Less: Intangible assets (1) (16,224 ) (13,908 ) (13,983 ) (14,107 ) (12,445 ) Noncumulative perpetual preferred stock (2) (853 ) Tangible common equity $ 23,422 $ 15,758 $ 12,558 $ 12,483 $ 14,166 Total assets to tangible assets Total assets $ 312,918 $ 206,019 $ 197,503 $ 169,646 $ 165,913 Less: Assets from discontinued operations (309 ) (305 ) (362 ) (24 ) Total assets from continuing operations 312,609 205,714 197,141 169,622 165,913 Less: Intangible assets (1) (16,224 ) (13,908 ) (13,983 ) (14,107 ) (12,445 ) Tangible assets $ 296,385 $ 191,806 $ 183,158 $ 155,515 $ 153,468 Non-GAAP TCE ratio Tangible common equity $ 23,422 $ 15,758 $ 12,558 $ 12,483 $ 14,166 Tangible assets 296,385 191,806 183,158 155,515 153,468 TCE ratio (3) 7.9 % 8.2 % 6.9 % 8.0 % 9.2 % Regulatory capital ratios Total stockholders equity $ 40,499 $ 29,666 $ 26,541 $ 26,590 $ 26,611 Less: Net unrealized losses (gains) on securities available for sale recorded in AOCI (4) (712 ) (289 ) (368 ) (200 ) 783 Net losses on cash flow hedges recorded in AOCI (4) 2 71 86 92 215 Disallowed goodwill and other intangible assets (5) (14,428 ) (13,855 ) (13,953 ) (14,125 ) (12,482 ) Disallowed deferred tax assets (534 ) (1,150 ) Noncumulative perpetual preferred stock (2) (853 ) Other (12 ) (2 ) (2 ) (2 ) (2 ) Tier 1 common capital 24,496 15,057 11,154 12,355 15,125 Plus: Noncumulative perpetual preferred stock (2) 853 Tier 1 restricted core capital items (6) 2 3,635 3,636 3,634 1,642 Tier 1 capital 25,351 18,692 14,790 15,989 16,767 Plus: Long-term debt qualifying as Tier 2 capital 2,119 2,438 2,827 3,018 1,813 Qualifying allowance for loan and lease losses 2,830 1,979 3,748 1,581 1,630 Other Tier 2 components 13 23 29 4 1 Tier 2 capital 4,962 4,440 6,604 4,603 3,444 Total risk-based capital (7) $ 30,313 $ 23,132 $ 21,394 $ 20,592 $ 20,211 Risk-weighted assets (8) $ 223,472 $ 155,657 $ 127,132 $ 116,309 $ 121,380 Tier 1 common ratio (9) 11.0 % 9.7 % 8.8 % 10.6 % 12.5 % Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio (10) 11.3 12.0 11.6 13.8 13.8 Total risk-based capital ratio (11) 13.6 14.9 16.8 17.7 16.7 (1) Includes impact from related deferred taxes. (2) Noncumulative perpetual preferred stock qualifies as Tier 1 capital; however, it does not qualify as Tier 1 common capital. (3) Calculated based on tangible common equity divided by tangible assets. (4) Amounts presented are net of tax. (5) Disallowed goodwill and other intangible assets are net of related deferred tax liability. (6) Consists primarily of trust preferred securities. (7) Total risk-based capital equals the sum of Tier 1 capital and Tier 2 capital. (8) Calculated based on prescribed regulatory guidelines. (9) Tier 1 common ratio is a regulatory capital measure calculated based on Tier 1 common capital divided by risk-weighted assets. (10) Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio is a regulatory capital measure calculated based on Tier 1 capital divided by risk-weighted assets. (11) Total risk-based capital ratio is a regulatory capital measure calculated based on total risk-based capital divided by risk-weighted assets. 127 Table of Contents 
